						ABEIL
						Vassal 									Soldier 								Queen
						Medium-Size Monstrous 					Large Monstrous 						Medium-Size Monstrous
						Humanoid 								Humanoid 								Humanoid
Hit Dice:				1d8 (4 hp)								6d8+18 (45 hp)							14d8+42 (105 hp)
Initiative: 			+1 										+1 										+5
Speed: 					30 ft., fly 60 ft. (average) 			40 ft., fly 90 ft. (good) 				40 ft., fly 80 ft. (good)
AC: 					11 (+1 Dex), 							10 (–1 size, +1 Dex), 					11 (+1 Dex),
						touch 11, flat-footed 10 				touch 10, flat-footed 9 				touch 11, flat-footed 10
Attacks: 				2 claws +1 melee and sting –4 			2 claws +11 melee and sting +6 			2 claws +18 melee and sting +13
						melee, or light flail +1 melee 			melee, or Huge ranseur +11/+6 			melee, or sickle +18/+13/+8
						and sting –4 melee, or 					melee and sting +6 melee, 				melee and sting +13 melee,
						javelin +2 ranged 						or Huge masterwork mighty 				or masterwork mighty
																composite longbow (+6 Str bonus) 		composite longbow (+4
																+7/+2 ranged 							Str bonus) +16/+11/+6 ranged
Damage: 				Claw 1d4, light flail 1d8, 				Claw 1d6+6, Huge ranseur 				Claw 1d6+4, sickle 1d6+4,
						sting 1d6 plus poison, 					2d6+9/×3, sting 1d8+3 plus poison, 		sting 2d4+2 plus poison,
						javelin 1d6 							Huge mighty composite longbow 			masterwork mighty composite
																(+6 Str bonus) 2d6+6/×3 				longbow (+4 Str bonus) 1d8+4/×3
Space/Reach: 			5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 					5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. (15 ft. with 		5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
																ranseur)
Special Attacks: 		Drone, improved grab, 					Drone, improved grab, poison, 			Drone, improved grab, poison,
						poison 									stormwing 								spells
Special Qualities: 		Darkvision 60 ft., hive mind 			Darkvision 60 ft., DR 5/+1, 			Darkvision 60 ft., DR 10/+1,
																hive mind, special enemy 				hive mind, SR 21
Saves: 					Fort +0, Ref +3, Will +4 				Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +6 				Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +14
Abilities: 				Str 11, Dex 13, Con 10, 				Str 22, Dex 13, Con 16 					Str 18, Dex 13, Con 16
						Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 9 					Int 9, Wis 12, Cha 13 					Int 15, Wis 21, Cha 18
Skills: 				Craft (any one) +4, Intuit 				Intuit Direction +6, Knowledge 			Concentration +13, Diplomacy
						Direction +6, Knowledge (any 			(any one), +1, Listen +6, Sense 		+6, Intimidate +13, Knowledge
						one) +2, Listen +5, Search +4, 			Motive +4, Spot +6, Wilderness 			(any two) +10, Listen +12, Sense
						Wilderness Lore +5 						Lore +7 								Motive +10, Spot +6, Wilderness
																										Lore +13
Feats: 					Dodge 									Dodge, Flyby Attack 					Dodge, Flyby Attack, Great
																										Fortitude, Improved Initiative,
																										item creation feat (any one),
																										metamagic feat (any one)
Climate/Terrain: 		Temperate or warm hills, 				Temperate or warm hills, plains, 		Temperate or warm hills, plains,
						plains, or desert 						or desert 								or desert
Organization: 			Solitary, pair, team (3–8), 			Solitary, pair, team (3–8), or 			Solitary or hive (1 plus 20–100
						or crew (10–40) 						troop (10–20) 							vassals and 5–30 soldiers)
Challenge Rating: 		2 										6 12
Treasure: 				Standard 								Standard 								Double standard
Alignment: 				Usually lawful 							Usually lawful 							Usually lawful
Advancement: 			By character class 						By character class 						By character class

Abeils are insectlike humanoids known for their industriousness and their complex social structure. They are commonly referred to as “bee people.” Their society has an expansionist philosophy—a fact that troubles those whose lands they intrude upon. Rather than resorting to war, abeils prefer to overcome rivals through superior resourcefulness and industry.
An abeil looks like a cross between an elf and a bee. A vassal or queen stands more than 7 feet high and has slender but sinewy legs and arms. A soldier is at least 10 feet tall and considerably more muscular than either of the other two varieties. An abeil’s hands and feet have four digits each. Its body is covered with bristly fur, colored in alternating bands of black and yellow. The creature’s head and facial features resemble those of an elf, except that the abeil has black, faceted eyes and long antennae. Like a bee, an abeil has translucent wings.
Abeils speak Common, Elven, and Sylvan.

COMBAT
All abeils prefer to fight from the sky, making ranged attacks and sonic assaults upon their foes below. If forced to fight on the ground, they coordinate their attacks to make the best use of their ranged weapons (and spells, for those capable of casting them). In melee, they prefer to swarm around particularly tough opponents and sting them with their enfeebling poison.Abeils fight to the death because they believe that cowardice on the battlefield could doom the hive. They rarely wear armor because it impedes their ability to fly.
Drone (Su): As a full-round action, an abeil can beat its wings to create a droning buzz in a 60-foot spread. Each creature in the area must make a Will save (see below for DCs) or fall asleep as the sleep spell. There is no Hit Dice limit for this effect. Abeils are immune to their own drone attacks as well as those of other abeils.
Improved Grab (Ex): If an abeil hits a single target that is at least one size category smaller than itself with both claws, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (see below for grapple bonuses). If it gets a hold, it automatically hits with its sting. Thereafter, the abeil has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its claws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the abeil is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals damage from both claws and the sting.
Hive Mind (Ex): All abeils within 25 miles of their queen are in constant communication. If one is aware of a particular danger, they all are. If one in a particular group is not flat-footed, none of them are. No abeil in such a group is considered flanked unless they all are.

VASSAL
Vassals are the backbone of abeil society. It is they who provide the menial labor for the hive. They gather pollen, maintain the hive-city, and obey their queen’s every command. Vassals produce the necessary goods for the abeil society, provide both mundane and specialized services, and advance the culture and techology of their hive city. A few even choose to leave behind their mundane tasks and pursue more individualistic paths, such as philosophy, art, religion, and politics. These abeils form an elite conclave called the vassal court that reports directly to the queen and serves as her council.

Combat
Unless ordered to attack, vassals flee combat to notify the hive of the threat. When armed for battle, they fight with light flails.
Drone (Su): Will save DC 9.
Improved Grab (Ex): A vassal’s grapple bonus is +1.
Poison (Ex): A vassal delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 10) with each successful sting attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1d4 points of Strength damage).

SOLDIER
These creatures account for fully a third of an abeil hivecity’s population. The soldiers are the queen’s army—the first and last line of defense for their hive. They are trained to respond swiftly to any danger. Soldiers consider most nearby civilizations to be threats and treat uninvited visitors with grave suspicion.

Combat
Abeil soldiers are often called stormwings because of the thunderous noise they make in battle. They prefer to meet a threat by using their stormwing attacks and bows first, then meleeing with ranseurs and stingers as needed.
Drone (Su): Will save DC 14.
Improved Grab (Ex): A soldier’s grapple bonus is +16.
Poison (Ex): A soldier delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 16) with each successful sting attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (2d4 points of Strength damage).
Stormwing (Su): As a full-round action, a soldier in flight can hover and deliver a destructive sonic attack with its wings. The attack deals 6d6 points of damage to all (except other abeils) within a 40-foot burst (Reflex save DC 16 for half damage). Once the soldier uses this ability, it must wait 1d4 rounds before using it again.
Special Enemy (Ex): An abeil soldier may select a type of creature as a special enemy. This ability is similar to the ranger’s favored enemy ability, and the soldier may choose from the same list (see the Ranger entry in Chapter 3 of the Player’s Handbook). Each soldier may select only one special enemy.
The soldier receives a +3 bonus on Bluff, Listen, Sense Motive, Spot, and Wilderness Lore checks when using these skills against its special enemy. Likewise, a soldier gets this same bonus on weapon damage rolls against creatures of the selected type.

QUEEN
At the pinnacle of any abeil society is the queen, who rules with absolute power. All the abeils in her realm live and die at her command. Though she was born to rule, the typical queen routinely seeks the advice of her court before committing to any major decisions.
The queen selects a mate from her vassal court and personally rears future queens. Each hive-city maintains 1–5 juvenile queens in addition to the reigning queen. Each such young queen has the same statistics as a vassal.

Combat
An abeil queen can cast powerful spells when threatened, and her poison is more virulent than that of any other abeil. However, she is rarely in combat because she depends primarily on her soldiers to protect her.
Drone (Su): Will save DC 21.
Improved Grab (Ex): A queen’s grapple bonus is +18.
Poison (Ex): A queen delivers her poison (Fortitude save DC 20) with each successful sting attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1d2 points of Strength drain).
Spells: An abeil queen can cast divine spells as a 16thlevel druid (spells/day 6/7/6/6/5/5/3/3/2; save DC 15 + spell level).

ABEIL SOCIETY
The hive-city is the central hub of the abeils’ busy society. Vassals buzz here and there, ensuring that vital city services continue, while patrols of soldiers vigilantly keep the peace and protect the hive against outside threats.
Abeils are highly imperialistic, though they are not so much concerned with conquering other races as they are with setting up new hive-cities. Nevertheless, this goal puts them into conflict with nearly every other race they encounter, since socieities in their path must fight for space and resources or be pushed out by the abeil civilization.
When a hive-city becomes too large, one of the young queens is given a substance called royal jelly, which converts her into a full-fledged queen. She then takes twenty vassals and five soldiers and leaves to set up a new hive-city at a previously scouted location.

ABEIL CHARACTERS
Although abeil society is extremely rigid, there is enough freedom within a hive to allow an individual abeil its own choice of profession. Even so, relatively few abeils desire to progress as characters. For those that do, the favored class is druid for queens or vassals and ranger for soldiers.
An abeil PC’s effective character level (ECL) is its class level plus the appropriate modifier: vassal +3, soldier +11, queen +21. For example, a 1st-level vassal druid has an ECL of 4 and is the equivalent of a 4th-level character.

						ASH RAT
						Small Magical Beast (Fire)
Hit Dice: 				1d10 (5 hp)
Initiative: 			+8
Speed: 					40 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 					16 (+1 size, +4 Dex, +1 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 				Bite +0 melee, or flame spit +6 ranged touch
Damage: 				Bite 1d4–2, flame spit 1d4 fire
Space/Reach: 			5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: 		Flame spit, heat
Special Qualities:		Darkvision 60 ft., fire heal, fire subtype, low-light vision, smoky hide
Saves: 					Fort +2, Ref +6, Will +1
Abilities: 				Str 6, Dex 18, Con 11, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 3
Skills: 				Climb +14, Hide +9*, Move Silently +5
Feats: 					Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: 		Any warm land
Organization: 			Solitary, nest (10–40) or horde (41–60)
Challenge Rating: 		1
Treasure: 				None
Alignment: 				Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: 			2–3 HD (Small)

Spreading fires throughout towns, fields and forests, ash rats constitute a deadly menace to any civilized society. These little nomadic horrors are naturally drawn to large sources of flame; in fact, they get their nourishment from heat in a way that not even the sages understand. These creatures are so hot that they ignite any combustibles they touch.
An ash rat is a 2-foot-long rodent with orange eyes. It has the general shape of a rat, and its fur is black, gray, or brown. Its oversized front teeth are a dull yellow color. An ash rat’s exact appearance is difficult for most onlookers to discern because it exudes a perpetual cloud of sooty smoke that hides it from view.

COMBAT
An ash rat normally flees from combat if possible. When cornered, it fights defensively, spitting fire at those who threaten it. Its heated body is painful to the touch, which prevents prudent foes from closing.
Flame Spit (Su): Once per round, an ash rat can spit flames at one target up to 10 feet away. This attack deals 1d4 points of fire damage.
Heat (Ex): An ash rat’s body heat deals 1d2 points of fire damage to each creature (except another ash rat) that touches it. Any flammable item in contact with an ash rat must make a successful Reflex save (DC 10) or catch fire (see Catching on Fire in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON MASTER’S Guide). When an ash rat dies, its body burns away completely in 1 round.
Fire Heal (Ex): Fire and heat heal an ash rat’s wounds. For every round that the creature is exposed to flame or heat intense enough to deal at least 1 point of damage, the creature instead gains the benefit of a cure minor wounds spell (1 hit point healed). Two or more ash rats touching each other provide enough heat for fire healing.
Fire Subtype (Ex): An ash rat is immune to fire damage but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Smoky Hide (Ex): An ash rat continually sheds smoke from its body. This smoky haze is so thick that it grants the creature one-half concealment (20% miss chance) and makes hiding easier (see Skills, below). Though it is difficult to see the ash rat because of the smoke rising from its body, the smoke itself is visible, provided that the area has sufficient light by which to see it.
Skills: An ash rat uses its Dexterity modifier instead of its Strength modifier for Climb checks. *In smoky or foggy areas, an ash rat gains a +8 bonus on Hide checks.

						ASPERI
						Large Magical Beast (Cold)
Hit Dice: 				4d10+8 (30 hp)
Initiative: 			+1
Speed: 					60 ft., fly 30 ft. (good)
AC: 					13 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 10, flatfooted 13
Attacks: 				2 hooves +4 melee and bite –1 melee
Damage: 				Hoof 1d6+1, bite 1d6
Space/Reach: 			5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: 		Cold subtype, darkvision 60 ft., dodge arrows, feather fall, low-light vision, ride the wind, telepathy, uncanny dodge, wind immunity
Saves: 					Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +2
Abilities: 				Str 13, Dex 12, Con 15, Int 13, Wis 12, Cha 10
Skills: 				Intimidate +7, Listen +10, Spot +10, Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: 					Alertness, Flyby Attack
Climate/Terrain: 		Any mountains
Organization: 			Solitary, pair, string (3–4), or herd (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 		4
Treasure: 				None
Alignment: 				Always neutral good
Advancement: 			5–6 HD (Medium-size)

At first glance, an asperi appears to be nothing more than an unusually beautiful horse. An individual asperi can be white, gray, or dun-colored, with a graceful, flowing mane of silver, white, or light gray. A secondary mane of the same shade as the first extends from the creature’s front shoulders down along the backs of its front legs.
Unlike typical horses, asperis are intelligent magical beasts. They live in the permanent cold of remote mountain peaks, where they gallop across the glaciers and through the frigid skies. By catching prevailing winds and flying with them, asperis can move even faster through the skies than their normal flying speed permits. Their ability to “ride the wind” in this way has earned them the common name of wind steeds.
The typical asperi belongs to a herd with up to twenty members, but it spends much of its time roaming the skies alone or with just one or two chosen companions. Hippogriffs and griffons, the mortal enemies of the asperis, are almost never encountered in mountains where wind steeds live, since the far more intelligent asperis take pains to drive them off or kill them. Asperis also dislike rocs, but they get along well with pegasi. Lasting friendships between asperis and pegasi are rare, however, because the winged horses seldom venture into the cold mountain heights where the wind steeds live.
If captured when very young and raised with respect and consideration, an asperi can be trained as a steed. Any potential rider must realize that an asperi mount is not a mere animal; it is an intelligent, sentient being with opinions and ideas of its own, and it demands to be treated as such.
Under no circumstances will an asperi tolerate a rider who is chaotic or evil. A paladin might convince an adult wind steed to serve as a permanent mount, but full-grown asperis usually agree to bear riders only in the short term, since they value their independence.
Asperis with 5 or more HD are very
rare. Such creatures have iridescent
hides that glisten like snow and
rainbow-hued manes and tails.

COMBAT

Asperis are inoffensive creatures by nature. Given their great speed, their usual response to danger is simply to fly away. Like most horses, however, they can fight ferociously when aroused. In combat, they usually kick and slash with their front hooves and bite with their powerful jaws.
Asperis prefer to fight from the air, which gives them a significant advantage against opponents on the ground, under the right conditions. Near their mountain homes, asperis always look for opportunities to attack intruders when the latter are at the edges of cliffs or maneuvering on narrow ledges. The wind steeds use combinations of charges, bull rushes, flyby attacks, and trip attacks (all while airborne) to force their enemies over precipices or into glacial crevasses. They usually prefer to use their speed and maneuverability to avoid combat until conditions are in their favor.
Cold Subtype (Ex): An asperi is immune to cold damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Dodge Arrows (Ex): A flying asperi gains a +2 dodge bonus to AC against any missile attack during any turn in which it takes a move action. If it has a rider, he or she also gains the bonus. The bonus lasts until the asperi’s next turn.
Feather Fall (Sp): An asperi can use feather fall up to four times per day. Caster level 4th.
Ride the Wind (Su): This ability is similar to the effect of the air walk spell in most respects. When an asperi uses ride the wind, it gains bonus movement (+1 ft. to fly speed for each 1 mph of the prevailing wind) when moving with winds faster than 20 mph. Adverse winds do not slow the creature down, but they provide no bonus movement.
An asperi carrying a rider gallops through the air so smoothly that the rider can cast spells without making Concentration checks, provided that the asperi does not attack or perform any sudden aerial maneuvers.
Telepathy (Su): An asperi can communicate with any creature that has an Intelligence score of at least 1 through a form of telepathy. This communication has a range of 60 feet, and its complexity is limited by the Intelligence score of the other creature.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Because of its preternatural alertness, an asperi retains its Dexterity bonus to AC even when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked.
Wind Immunity (Ex): Winds, either natural or magical, have no effect on an asperi unless it chooses to ride them for additional movement (see Ride the Wind, above). This benefit applies equally to mountain gales, magical windstorms, elemental whirlwinds, and other similar effects.

TRAINING AN ASPERI

Young asperis are worth 7,000 gp per head. They mature at the same rate as horses do. A professional trainer charges 2,000 gp to rear an asperi or to train it as a mount.
Training an asperi requires a successful Handle Animal check (DC 22 for a young asperi, DC 29 for an adult) and the willing cooperation of the creature. An asperi can fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds at a Ride check.
Carrying Capacity: A light load for an asperi is up to 150 pounds; a medium load, 151–300 pounds; and a heavy load, 301–450 pounds. Unlike most flying mounts, an asperi can fly with a medium or heavy load, thanks to its ride the wind ability.

						AUTOMATON
						Pulverizer 								Hammerer
						Medium-Size Construct 					Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 				3d10 (16 hp) 							5d10 (27 hp)
Initiative: 			+0 										+0
Speed: 					40 ft. 									20 ft.
AC: 					21 (+11 natural), touch 10,				21 (+11 natural), touch 10,
						flat-footed 21							flat-footed 21
Attacks: 				2 slams +7 melee 						Slam +10 melee
Damage: 				Slam 1d6+5 								Slam 2d8+10
Space/Reach: 			5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 					5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: 		Sonic shriek 							—
Special Qualities: 		Blindsight 40 ft., construct traits,	Construct traits, unreliable
						unreliable
Saves: 					Fort +1, Ref +1, Will +0 				Fort +1, Ref +1, Will +0
Abilities: 				Str 21, Dex 11, Con —					Str 25, Dex 11, Con —, 
						Int —, Wis 9, Cha 4						Int —, Wis 9, Cha 4
Climate/Terrain: 		Any land and underground 				Any land and underground
Organization: 			Solitary, pair, or team (3–5) 			Solitary, pair, or team (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 		3 										3
Treasure: 				None 									None
Alignment: 				Always neutral 							Always neutral
Advancement: 			4–8 HD (Medium-size); 9 HD (Large) 		6–8 HD (Medium-size); 9–15 HD (Large)28

An automaton is a creature built for labor or war. Although the construct is superficially similar to a golem, an automaton is actually quite different. It is built with clockwork parts and animated by means of powerful shadow magic. While the shadow consciousness of an automaton sometimes makes it difficult for the creature to interact with the physical world, it nevertheless can be a fearsome opponent.

COMBAT

Like golems, automatons are mindless but tenacious combatants. Since they are emotionless in combat, they are not easily provoked. Automatons don’t use weapons, even if ordered to do so. Instead, they always strike with their limbs, which are formidable weapons in themselves.
An automaton follows the orders of its creator. The creature can be commanded directly by its creator if the latter is within 60 feet and both visible and audible to the automaton. If uncommanded, an automaton follows its last instruction to the best of its ability, though it returns any attacks directed at it. Typically, the creator gives an automaton a simple set of instructions (such as “Remain in this area and attack all creatures that enter,” or “Attack all bipedal creatures you see,” or “Ring a gong and attack,” or the like) to govern its actions in his or her absence.
Construct Traits: An automaton is immune to mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. It cannot heal itself but can be healed through repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. An automaton has darkvision (60-foot range).
Unreliable (Ex): The shadow consciousness of an automaton is only quasireal, like the consciousness of a creation such as a simulacrum. The creature is thus sometimes slow to react to the changing environment around it.
At the beginning of each round in which an automaton attempts to act, roll 1d20. On a result of 11 or better, it acts normally; otherwise, it takes no action.

PULVERIZER
The pulverizer automaton was originally intended as a mining machine. Its sonic shriek was designed to weaken stone, and its wedges to finish the job of breaking it up. Thanks to its blindsight ability, this construct is particularly effective underground.
A pulverizer looks something like a four-legged, metal lobster with spiked wedges instead of claws. Instead of a head, it has a round opening at the top of its body from which it emits its sonic attacks.

Combat
When attacking, a lone pulverizer usually looses its sonicX
shriek, then moves in to use its slam attacks against any
foes who are still moving. Teams of these creatures pose a
formidable threat on the battlefield, since one or more can
hang back and shriek every round while the others close
with foes.
Sonic Shriek (Ex): Once per round as a standard action, a
pulverizer can loose a cone of sonic energy 30 feet long.
Everything within the cone takes 1d8 points of sonic
damage. In addition, every creature within the cone that
fails a Fortitude save (DC 13) is stunned for 1 round. (This
value incorporates a +5 racial bonus to the save DC.)
Blindsight (Ex): A pulverizer is blind, but it maneuvers
and fights as well as a sighted creature by using sonar, like
that of a bat. This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 40 feet. The pulverizer usually does not need to
make Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures within range
of its blindsight. A silence spell negates this ability.
HAMMERER
The hammerer automaton is a roughly human-shaped,
bipedal war machine adapted from another automaton that
was designed for construction and heavy lifting. One of
the creature’s two arms ends in a massive claw or pincer,
the other in an even more massive hammer.
Combat
Hammerers are not built for fancy tactical maneuvers, but
they are still fearsome opponents. On the battlefield, commanders simply point teams of these constructs at the
enemy and let them go.
The powerful hammer-arm that gives the hammerer its
name is a nasty piece of business—heavy, solid, and deadly.
The pincer-arm is used mainly for lifting things. The construct can attack with only one arm at a time, and although
it can slam with either arm, it favors the hammer-arm for all
its attacks.
AVOLAKIA
Large Aberration
Hit Dice: 10d8+30 (75 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +6 deflection), touch 18, flatfooted 15
Attacks: Bite +10 melee and 8 claws +8 melee
Damage: Bite 2d6+4 plus poison, claw 1d4+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison, spell-like abilities, suggestion
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., defensive aura, fire
resistance 10, immunities, regeneration 4, SR 21
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +12
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 16, Con 17, Int 16, Wis 21, Cha 22
Skills: Bluff +14, Concentration +14, Diplomacy +18,
Intimidate +8, Sense Motive +18, Spellcraft +11
Feats: Combat Casting, Combat Reflexes, Dodge,
Multiattack, Quicken Spell-Like Ability
Climate/ Terrain: Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, band (3–8), or tribe (4–24 avolakias plus 3–30 zombies, 2–12 wights, and 1–6 mummies)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: Standard coins, standard goods, double items
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: By character class
The avolakia is a nauseating creature that combines the
worst aspects of a worm, an octopus, and an insect. It has
exceptional intelligence and is incredibly wise and glib.
Avolakias are experts at infiltrating humanoid societies for a
variety of nefarious purposes.
An avolakia stands 10 feet tall. Its wormlike body is
pallid and gray, shimmering with a pale yellow slime. The
creature supports itself and moves about on a set of six
suckered tentacles, each of which is tipped with a multifaceted yellow eye. Its “head” consists of a fleshy sheath
that houses a set of three cruelly hooked mandibles. Eight
long, spidery arms tipped with tiny insectoid claws that
almost look like human hands protrude from a set of
ridges about halfway up the creature’s body. An avolakia
reeks of mold and decay.
Although they can digest dead or living flesh, avolakias
find both disgusting and resort to such sustenance only
under dire circumstances. They prefer to eat undead flesh—
“fresh” off a zombie’s flank is best.
Avolakias speak their own language (a guttural, slobbering tongue). Many of them also understand Undercommon
and other languages, though they do not have the vocal
apparatus to speak them. With its polymorph self spell-like
ability, however, an avolakia can assume a form that is capable of speaking any language it desires. This ability also
enhances its disguise capabilities and aids it in laying
ambushes for unwary opponents.
AVOLAKIACOMBAT
An avolakia prefers to cast spells or use its spell-like abilities
from a distance while its undead minions close to melee
with the enemy. If forced into melee, an avolakia uses its
poisonous bite and flails with its eight claws. Occasionally,
the creature may choose to use poison against one or more
foes, then assume humanoid form and use its suggestion ability to bend them to its will.
Poison (Ex): An avolakia delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 18) with each successful bite attack.
The initial damage is 1d6 points of Wisdom damage, and the secondary damage is 2d6
points of Wisdom damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—chill
touch, cause fear, detect magic, disrupt
undead, gentle repose, ghoul touch, halt
undead, mage hand, polymorph self
(humanoid form only), read magic, spectral hand; 3/day—animate dead, create
undead, enervation, vampiric touch. Caster
level 14th; save DC 16 + spell level.
Suggestion (Sp): When in humanoid form, an avolakia has a
melodious and hypnotic voice. By
speaking soothingly to any one
creature in range that understands its spoken words, the
avolakia can create an effect
identical to that of a quickened
suggestion spell (caster level 10th;
Will save DC 19). An opponent
in eye contact with the creature
while it makes its suggestion
takes a –2 penalty on the saving
throw. The avolakia can use this
ability a number of times per day
equal to its Charisma modifier
(usually six times per day).
Defensive Aura (Sp): An avolakia has a +6 deflection bonus to Armor Class. This ability is always in effect.
Fire Resistance (Ex): The slime that an avolakia constantly exudes grants it fire resistance 10. It also helps the
creature escape more easily (see Skills, below).
Immunities (Su): Because of its close association with
undead, the avolakia has developed immunity to cold, disease, energy drain, and paralysis.
Regeneration (Ex): An avolakia takes normal damage
from acid, fire, and electricity.
Skills: Because of the slime it constantly exudes, an avolakia gains a +10 competence bonus on Escape Artist checks.
AVOLAKIA SOCIETY
Avolakias band together in small tribes deep in the recesses of
the earth. They delight in creating and modifying undead of
all sorts, which they use for both food and defense. Avolakia
clerics make good use of the create greater undead spell to create
mummies, spectres, vampires, and ghosts. They often arm
these greater undead with magic weapons, armor, and wondrous items to aid them in defending the avolakias’ territory.
The majority of avolakias have taken to worshiping Kyuss, a
little-known quasi-deity. Despite the fact that their deity’s
divine status does not enable him to grant spells, many
avolakia clerics are quite powerful, drawing their spells
from some unknown source.
So eager are the avolakias to elevate Kyuss to full deity status
that they actively recruit new worshipers for his cult. The creatures typically
establish settlements beneath the communities of surface races, then use their polymorph self
and suggestion abilities to infiltrate their
target areas. Often a group of avolakias
infiltrates a local religious institution and
attempts to assume control of the funerary
rites for the community. Should the
avolakias succeed, they have access to
plenty of corpses that they can use to
create more undead. In addition, the
disguised avolakias are in a perfect
position to corrupt selected members of
the community and slowly indoctrinate
them into the cult of Kyuss.
Avolakias also interact with various
Underdark races. Some, such as the
drow, they infiltrate in much the
same way as they do surface races.
With others, such as mind
flayers, they openly propose
alliances for the two groups’ mutual benefit. A typical agreement between
mind flayers and avolakias stipulates that
both groups hunt down and capture
intelligent beings. The mind flayers
consume the unfortunate victims’ brains,
then hand the bodies over to the avolakias, who use them to
create undead. But such alliances tend to fall apart eventually,
either when the mind flayers enslave captives for long periods
before consuming their brains, or when the avolakias kill a
few mind flayers to make more powerful undead creatures.
AVOLAKIA CHARACTERS
An avolakia’s favored class is sorcerer, but avolakia clerics are
also quite common, and tribal leaders are always clerics of
Kyuss. Avolakia spellcasters of any sort tend to focus on
necromantic magic. Though they may choose from any of
Kyuss’s domains (Death, Evil, Magic, or Trickery), the majority choose Death and Evil.
An avolakia PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 15; thus, a 1st-level avolakia sorcerer has an
ECL of 16 and is the equivalent of a 16th-level character.
29
AVOLAKIA30
BANSHEE
Medium-Size Undead (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 26d12 (169 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: Fly 80 ft. (good)
AC: 16 (+3 Dex, +3 deflection), touch 16, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Incorporeal touch +16 melee
Damage: Incorporeal touch 1d8/19–20 plus 1d4 Charisma
drain
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Charisma drain, horrific appearance, wail
Special Qualities: Detect living, incorporeal subtype, SR
28, stunt plants, undead traits
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +19
Abilities: Str —, Dex 17, Con —, Int 16, Wis 15, Cha 17
Skills: Balance +5, Hide +13, Intuit Direction +7, Jump +2,
Listen +24, Scry +13, Search +23, Spot +24, Tumble +16
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes,
Dodge, Expertise, Improved Critical (incorporeal touch), Improved Initiative,
Iron Will, Mobility, Spring Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and
underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or
brood (3–4)
Challenge Rating: 17
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: 27–52 HD
(Medium-size)
A banshee is the spirit of a strongwilled, selfish individual of a
humanoid race. Because of its
rage at the loss of its own life, it
delights in bringing death to any
living creature it encounters.
This creature appears as a translucent image of the form it held in life.
With the passage of time, the banshee’s image tends to become blurred
and indistinct, though the creature
remains recognizable as a humanoid.
The very presence of a banshee creates a
pall over the landscape. Its ability to stunt
the growth of plants combined with its deadly wail
eventually reduces the surrounding territory to blasted heath
and wasteland. Largely for this reason, many cultures consider a sudden blight upon the land to be an omen of death.
A banshee speaks the languages that it knew in life.
COMBAT
Banshees hate all living things with an unholy fury, and they
readily attack anyone foolish enough to trespasses within
their territories. A banshee typically uses its horrific appearance to drive off less powerful foes, then employs its howling
wail one or more times to damage any who remain. Finally, it
finishes off the intruders with its Charisma drain in melee. If
overmatched, the creature flees into the earth, usually to a
gravelike lair that it maintains beneath the surface.
Charisma Drain (Su): An individual struck by a banshee must make a Fortitude save (DC 26) or permanently
lose 1d4 points of Charisma (or 2d4 points on a critical hit).
The banshee heals 5 points of damage (10 on a critical hit)
whenever it drains Charisma, gaining any excess as temporary hit points.
Horrific Appearance (Su): Any living creature within 60
feet that views a banshee must make a successful Fortitude
save (DC 26) or permanently lose 1d4 points of Strength, 1d4
points of Dexterity, and 1d4 points of Constitution. A creature
that successfully saves against this effect cannot be affected
by the same banshee’s horrific appearance for 24 hours.
Wail (Su): During the night, a banshee can loose a
deadly wail. This attack can slay up to eighteen living
creatures within a 30-foot spread centered on the banshee, or within a 60-foot cone extending from the
banshee, at the creature’s option. A successful Fortitude save (DC 26) negates the effect. Once a
banshee wails, it must wait 1d4 rounds before it
can do so again, and it can wail no more than
three times per day.
Detect Living (Sp): This ability functions like
the commune with nature spell, except that it
detects only living creatures and the range is
one-half mile. The banshee can use detect living
up to three times per day.
Incorporeal Subtype: A banshee can be
harmed only by other incorporeal creatures, +1
or better magic weapons, spells, spell-like
abilities, and supernatural abilities. The creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage
from a corporeal source, except for force
effects or attacks made with ghost
touch weapons. A banshee can pass
through solid objects, but not
force effects, at will. Its attacks
ignore natural armor, armor,
and shields, but deflection bonuses
and force effects work normally against
them. A banshee always moves silently and cannot
be heard with Listen checks if it doesn’t wish to be.
Stunt Plants (Su): Once per day, a banshee can stunt all
normal plants within a one-half mile radius. This ability
otherwise functions like the stunt version of a diminish
plants spell (caster level 18th).
Undead Traits: A banshee is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a
Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It is not subject
BANSHEEto critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability drain,
energy drain, or death from massive damage. A banshee
cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is willing.
The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
BLADELING
Medium-Size Outsider (Lawful)
Hit Dice: 1d8 (4 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 15 (+1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Claw +1 melee, or longsword +1 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6, longsword 1d8/19–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Razor storm
Special Qualities: Cold resistance 5, DR 5/+1 (slashing
and piercing weapons only), fire resistance 5, immunities, outsider traits
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +3, Will +2
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 13, Con 11, Int 10, Wis 10, Cha 10
Skills: Craft (weaponsmithing) +4, Jump +4
Feats: Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary, pair, company (3–6), or squad
(11–20)
Challenge Rating: 1
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always lawful (usually lawful neutral or
lawful evil)
Advancement: By character class
Bladelings are xenophobic beings of humanoid shape.
Though they hail from Acheron, most scholars believe
that the race emigrated there from another plane, possibly
the Nine Hells of Baator, the Bleak Eternity of Gehenna, or
even some unknown metal-based plane.
A bladeling has skin of a dull metallic hue, spotted with
patches of metallic spines. Its eyes gleam like shards of
purple ice, and its blood is black and oily.
Bladelings speak Common, and those with high enough
Intelligence scores to know an additional language usually
speak Infernal as well.
COMBAT
Bladelings are quick to jump into battle, relying on their
tough skins and natural agility to see them through any
fight. They are also brave, so they usually focus their attacks
on the most dangerous combatants they see.
Razor Storm (Ex): Once per day, a bladeling can expel
shrapnellike bits of its skin in a 15-foot cone, dealing 2d6
points of piercing damage to any creature in the area. A
Reflex save (DC 10) halves the damage. After this attack, the
bladeling’s natural armor bonus drops to +2 for 24 hours.
Immunities (Ex): A bladeling takes no damage from acid,
and it is immune to rust attacks despite its metallic hide.
Outsider Traits: A bladeling has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
BLADELING SOCIETY
Most bladelings live in the city of Zoronor, on Ocanthus,
the fourth layer of Acheron. Some, however, wander the
other layers of Acheron or even the other planes.
Bladelings are superstitious and xenophobic creatures, so
it’s no surprise that they abhor intrusions into their home
territory. (Of course, as residents of Ocanthus—a place of
flying storms of blades—they rarely have visitors.) Their
society is prone to internal strife, but they immediately
band together against external dangers. Bladelings that
travel the planes are reasonably amiable toward strangers,
perhaps because they have picked up a degree of tolerance
for other beings through constant contact. Even so, they
tend not to trust anyone they do not know.
BLADELING CHARACTERS
A bladeling’s favored class is fighter. Leaders are often
cleric/fighters, and the race is known for its assassins as
well. Bladeling clerics usually worship Hextor.
A bladeling PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 1; thus, a 1st-level bladeling fighter has an
ECL of 2 and is the equivalent of a 2nd-level character.
31
BLADELING32
BLOOD APE
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 4d10+8 (30 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
AC: 14 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 claws +8 melee and bite +3 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+5, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Growth, improved grab, rend 2d4+7
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +2
Abilities: Str 21, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 7
Skills: Climb +15, Listen +3, Spot +3
Feats: Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest and
mountains
Organization: Solitary, patrol (1 alpha male plus 1–4
males), or colony (1 alpha male plus 2–5
males and 7–21 noncombatants)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Large); 9–12
HD (Huge)
Blood apes are peaceful diurnal
foragers with a unique defense
mechanism. The alpha male
(or leader) of a troop or patrol
has the magical ability to make
himself and other members of
the group larger. Their Huge
forms (see Growth,
below) allow them to
deal more damage in
combat, but the ability
to return to Large size
means that they require substantially less
food than Huge creatures would. Sages and
scholars suggest that
this ability is a residual
effect of exceptionally strong growth and form-altering
magic practiced on the ancestors of the current blood apes
millennia ago.
A blood ape resembles a red-furred mountain gorilla. Its
body is compact but muscular, and its sinewy arms end in
humanlike hands. The alpha male is typically the largest ape
in a group. Unlike the rest of the group, he has silvery fur
and a balding head.
Blood apes are exceptionally territorial, and they fight to
the death to protect their young and their land from
intruders. Patrols occasionally forage far from the colony’s
lair in search of new feeding grounds.
COMBAT
The alpha male in any group of blood apes begins using his
growth ability on the other males at the first sign of intruders. After receiving the benefit of this power, all the males
pair up to attack specific opponents. Blood apes give no
warning and make no display before attacking. The alpha
male uses his growth ability on himself last, then enters
melee. If females and young are present, they beat a hasty
retreat while the males fight.
Growth (Sp): The alpha male in every group of blood
apes can use this power up to eight times per day. It functions like an animal growth
spell (caster level 9th),
except that it works only
on adult male blood apes.
The following changes
apply to all subject blood
apes as long as the effect of
growth lasts: SZ Huge; HD
8d10+32 (76 hp); Init +1;
AC 15 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +6
natural), touch 9, flat-footed
14; Atk +15 melee (2d4+9,
2 claws) and +10 melee
(2d6+4, bite); SV Fort +10,
Ref +7, Will +3; Space/Reach
10 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.; Str 29,
Dex 13, Con 18; Climb +19.
Improved Grab (Ex): If
a blood ape hits an opponent that is at least one size
category smaller than itself
with a claw attack, it deals
normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as
a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +13,
or +25 if under growth effect). If it hits with both
claws, it can also rend in the
same round. Once it has a
hold, the blood ape has the option to conduct the grapple
normally, or simply use its claw to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the blood ape is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals claw damage.
Rend (Ex): If a blood ape hits with both claws, it latches
onto the opponent’s body and tears the flesh. This attack
automatically deals an additional 2d4+7 points of damage
(or 2d4+13 if under a growth effect; see above).
BLOOD APEScent (Ex): A blood ape can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
BLOOD APE SOCIETY
One-third of the noncombatants in any colony are infants
and youths, and the balance are adult females. The females
have the same statistics as the males, but without the growth,
improved grab, and rend abilities. The young have no
combat ability.
The alpha male of a colony is the only one permitted to
mate with the females of that group. As a colony grows
larger, the younger males eventually break off and attempt
to form their own colonies by stealing a few females. A
male who succeeds immediately gains the growth ability,
and over a period of six months he develops the characteristic silver fur and bald head of an alpha male.
BOGGLE
Small Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp)
Initiative: +9
Speed: 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
AC: 18 (+1 size, +5 Dex, +2 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 2 claws +5 melee and bite +0 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4, bite 1d4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Darkvision 60 ft.,
improved grab, rend 2d4
Special Qualities: Dimension door,
DR 5/+1, fire resistance 5, grease,
scent
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +9, Will +3
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 21, Con
11, Int 5, Wis 8, Cha 6
Skills: Climb +8, Escape
Artist +17, Hide +11,
Move Silently +10, Pick
Pocket +12
Feats: Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or crew (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: 50% coins, 50% goods, no items
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Small); 9–12
HD (Medium-size)
Boggles are clever, gibbering scavengers
that behave much like some species of
monkeys. They do not value treasure, but
they do like to collect bright, shiny objects
such as coins, precious gems, and jewelry, as well
as bits of polished junk. In addition, they can often be
tempted with food and sweets.
A boggle is a 3-foot-tall, hairless humanoid with a rubbery
hide. It has a large, bulbous, bald head, huge ears, and disproportionate body parts, though the exact details vary from
one individual to another. For example, a boggle’s nose
might be large and crooked, broad and flat, or nonexistent
except for nostril slits. Arms, legs, hands, feet, torso, and
abdomen vary from spindly to oversized but are almost
always misshapen. Skin color may be any shade from dark
gray to blackish-blue. A boggle can stretch and compress its
body and limbs to a remarkable degree, which accounts for
its impressive reach.
Boggles have their own rudimentary language of grunts
and whistles.
COMBAT
Boggles are a cowardly lot. They taunt, bluster, and scold in
their gibbering language, but always from a distance. If
they know intruders are approaching, they often use their
grease ability to make a section of floor slippery ahead of
time, so that they can easily steal baubles from anyone who
falls. When forced to fight, a boggle prefers to climb a wall
and leap down on prey from above, so that it can bring its
hind claws to bear for rending.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a boggle
hits an opponent of up to one size category larger than itself with a claw
attack, it deals normal damage and
attempts to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +5). If it hits
with both claws, it can also rend in the
same round. The boggle has the option to
conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its claw to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the boggle
is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it
makes during successive rounds automatically deals claw damage.
Dimension Door (Sp): A boggle can use
dimension door up to six times per day.
Caster level 7th.
Grease (Su): At will, a boggle can
secrete an oily, viscous, nonflammable
substance from its skin. This ability
functions like the spell grease except
that the range is touch, the duration is 1 round per Hit Die of
the boggle (4 rounds for the
typical creature), and the
Reflex save DC is 12. Typically, a boggle uses this ability to grease a section of floor
33
BOGGLE
AL34
or wall, though it can use the ability in any of the ways that
the spell can be used. This oily fluid also makes the boggle
tougher to hold onto (see Skills, below). Boggles are
immune to the effects of this substance.
Rend (Ex): If a boggle hits a single target with both claws,
it latches onto the opponent’s body and tears the flesh. This
attack deals 2d4 points of damage.
Scent (Ex): A boggle can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: Because of its perpetually oily skin, a boggle gains
a +10 racial bonus on Escape Artist checks.
BOGUN
Tiny Construct
Hit Dice: 2d10 (11 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft., fly 50 ft. (good)
AC: 15 (+2 size, +3 Dex), touch 15, flat-footed 12
Attacks: Nettles +1 melee
Damage: Nettles 1d4–2 plus poison
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison
Special Qualities: Construct traits
Saves: Fort +0, Ref +3, Will +1
Abilities: Str 7, Dex 16, Con —, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 11
Climate/Terrain: Any land (typically forest)
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 1
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral (same as the
creator)
Advancement: 3–6 HD (Tiny)
A bogun is a small nature servant created by a
druid. Like a homunculus, it is an extension of
its creator. Thus, it has the same
alignment and link to nature
that its master has.
A bogun looks like a
vaguely humanoid mound
of compost. The creator
determines its precise
features, but the typical
version stands about 18
inches tall and has a wingspan of about 2 feet. Its skin is
covered with nettles and branches.
Insect carapaces, feathers, scales,
and other forest detritus may also
be part of its form.
A bogun does not fight particularly
well, but it can perform any simple action, such as
attacking, carrying a message, or opening a door or window.
For the most part, the creature simply carries out its creator’s instructions. Because it is self-aware and somewhat
willful, however, its behavior is not entirely predictable.
On rare occasions (5% of the time), a bogun may refuse to
perform a particular task. In that case, the creator must
make a Diplomacy check (DC 11) to convince the creature
to cooperate. Success means the bogun performs the task
as requested; failure indicates that it either does exactly
the opposite or refuses to do anything at all for 24 hours
(DM’s option).
A bogun cannot speak, but the process of creating one
links it telepathically with its creator. It knows what its creator knows and can convey to him or her everything it sees
and hears, up to a range of 1,500 feet. A bogun never travels
beyond this range willingly, though it can be removed
forcibly. In such a case, it does everything in its power to
regain contact with its creator.
Any attack that destroys a bogun deals its creator 2d10
points of damage. If the creator is slain, the bogun also dies,
and its body collapses into a heap of rotting vegetation.
COMBAT
A bogun has very little offensive capability, since its primary purpose is to carry out small tasks. Nevertheless, it is
capable of attacking, either on
the command of its creator or
in self-defense.
A bogun usually tries to flee
from combat. If it is prevented from
escaping, it attacks by raking opponents with its poisonous nettles.
Poison (Ex): A bogun’s
nettles deliver an irritating
poison (Fortitude save DC 11)
with each successful attack. The
initial and secondary damage is
the same (1d6 points of Dexterity damage). The creator of a
bogun is immune to its poison.
Construct Traits: A bogun is
immune to mind-affecting effects,
poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning,
disease, death effects, necromantic
effects, and any effect that requires a
Fortitude save unless it also works
on objects. The creature is not
subject to critical hits, subdual
damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death
from massive damage. Although
it is made of vegetable matter, a
bogun is not a plant and is therefore not subject to spells that
affect only plants or plant creatures. It
cannot heal itself but can be healed through
BOGUNrepair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A bogun has darkvision (60-foot range).
CONSTRUCTION
Unlike a homunculus, a bogun is created from natural materials available in any forest. Thus, there is no gold piece cost
for its creation. All materials used become permanent parts
of the bogun.
The creator must be at least 7th level and possess the
Craft Wondrous Item feat to make a bogun. Before casting
any spells, the creator must weave a physical form out of
living (or once-living) vegetable matter to hold the magical
energy. A bit of the creator’s own body, such as a few strands
of hair or a drop of blood, must also be incorporated into
this crude mannequin. The creator may assemble the body
personally or hire someone else to do it. Creating the mannequin requires a Craft (basketweaving) or Craft (weaving)
check (DC 12).
Once the body is finished, the creator must animate it
through an extended magical ritual that requires a week to
complete. He or she must labor for at least 8 hours each day
in complete solitude in a forest grove; any interruption from
another sentient creature undoes the magic. If the creator is
personally weaving the creature’s body, that process and the
ritual can be performed together.
When not actively working on the ritual, the creator
must rest and can perform no other activities except
eating, sleeping, or talking. Missing even one day causes
the process to fail. At that point, the ritual must be started
anew, though the previously crafted body and the grove
can be reused.
On the final day of the ritual, the creator must personally
cast control plants, wood shape, and beget bogun (see below).
These spells can come from outside sources, such as scrolls,
rather than being prepared, if the creator prefers.
BEGET BOGUN
Conjuration (Creation)
Level: Drd 1
Components: V, S, M, XP
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Effect: Tiny construct
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: None
Spell Resistance: No
Beget bogun allows you to infuse living magic into a small
mannequin that you have created from vegetable matter.
This is the final spell in the process of creating a bogun. See
the bogun’s description, above, for further details.
Material Component: The mannequin from which the
bogun is created.
XP Cost: 25 XP.
BONE NAGA
Large Undead
Hit Dice: 15d12 (97 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 16 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +6 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Sting +9 melee and bite +4 melee
Damage: Sting 2d4+3 plus poison, bite 1d4+1 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft. (coiled)/10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison, spells
Special Qualities: Detect thoughts, guarded thoughts,
immunities, SR 23, telepathy, undead traits
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +8, Will +11
Abilities: Str 16, Dex 13, Con —, Int 16, Wis 15, Cha 17
Skills: Bluff +12, Concentration +14, Diplomacy +7, Hide
+11, Intimidate +12, Listen +12, Sense Motive +8,
Spellcraft +14, Spot +12
Feats: Alertness, Combat Casting, Dodge, Improved
Initiative, Lightning Reflexes, metamagic feat (any one),
Spell Focus (any one school)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 16–21 HD (Large); 22–45 HD (Huge)
A bone naga was once a living dark naga. After its death, it
was transformed into a skeletal undead creature by another
dark naga through a horrific ritual.
A bone naga looks like a 12-foot-long, serpentine
skeleton. Its skull bears an eerie resemblance to that of a
human, except that the bone naga sports long fangs that
can deliver a debilitating poison. A cold, cruel light
burns in the creature’s eye sockets, giving it an air of
unspeakable hatred and malice. Its tail ends in a vicious
bone stinger which, like its teeth, delivers poison with
every hit.
Though it despises its servitude, a bone naga unswervingly obeys its creator, attacking even other nagas if so
commanded. Should its master die, a bone naga becomes
free-willed and can choose its own destiny.
COMBAT
Bone nagas under the control of masters are given explicit
instructions on how to deal with enemies. Beyond that,
these highly intelligent undead can make their own decisions about methods for defeating particular foes.
A bone naga typically uses its mind-reading abilities to
determine its foes’ strengths and weaknesses before joining combat. It often begins by trying to intimidate its
enemies with telepathic taunts. Thereafter, it resorts to
spellcasting to soften up the more powerful-looking
35
BONE NAGA36
opponents before entering melee. A bone naga is likely to
focus its melee attacks on living opponents rather than
undead or constructs, since the living are susceptible to
its poison.
Poison (Ex): A bone naga delivers its poison via successful bite or sting attacks. The poison from its bite (Fortitude
save DC 17) has the same initial and secondary damage (1d4
points of Strength damage). The poison from its sting (Fortitude save DC 17) is more virulent; its initial damage is 1d4
points of Constitution drain, and the secondary damage is
1d4 points of Constitution damage.
Spells: A bone naga casts spells as a 14th-level sorcerer
(spells known 9/5/5/4/4/3/2/1; spells/day 6/7/7/7/6/
6/5/3; save DC 13 + spell level).
Detect Thoughts (Su): A bone naga can continuously
detect the thoughts of those around it. This ability functions
like a detect thoughts spell (caster level 9th; Will save DC 15),
and it is always active.
Guarded Thoughts (Ex): Because of their ability to
shield their thoughts, bone nagas are immune to any form
of mind-reading.
Immunities (Ex): Bone nagas are immune to cold. Also,
because they lack flesh or internal organs, they take only
half damage from piercing weapons.
Telepathy (Su): A bone naga can communicate telepathically with any creature within 250 feet that has a language.
Undead Traits: A bone naga is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. A bone naga cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision (60-
foot range).
BONE OOZE
Gargantuan Ooze
Hit Dice: 20d10+210 (320 hp)
Initiative: –5
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 1 (–4 size, –5 Dex), touch 1, flat-footed 1
Attacks: 2 slams +26 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+15 plus ability drain plus wounding
Space/Reach: 30 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Ability drain, bone meld, engulf, wounding
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., DR 30/+5, ooze traits,
SR 32
Saves: Fort +15, Ref +1, Will +1
Abilities: Str 40, Dex 1, Con 28, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 21
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 21–30 HD (Gargantuan); 31–60 HD
(Colossal)
Bone oozes slide along underground, scavenging for bones.
These disgusting creatures are called rolling graveyards
because of all the bones suspended in their bodies.
A bone ooze appears as an immense, undulating mass of
goo the color of bleached bone. Jagged, bony protrusions jut
from the monster’s mass here and there, and more bones in
various stages of digestion are suspended within its translucent body. A bone ooze normally maintains a roughly spherical shape, measuring more than 30 feet in diameter and
weighing more than 40,000 pounds, though it can alter its
shape to flow through a space as small as 5 feet by 5 feet.
Because the bones it contains give its amorphous shape
firmer support than the typical ooze has, it takes 1 round for
a bone ooze to squeeze through an opening too small for its
normal dimensions.
COMBAT
A bone ooze attacks by slamming opponents or by
rolling over them. It tries to engulf opponents
whenever possible, so that it can use its bone
meld. A bone ooze’s attacks also cause
bleeding wounds.
Ability Drain (Ex): A successful slam
attack from a bone ooze absorbs some of
the victim’s bone structure. Any melee hit
deals 1d6 Strength drain, 1d6 Dexterity
drain, and 1d6 Constitution drain. On a
critical hit, it drains twice that amount
from each affected score. A bone ooze
heals 5 points of damage it has taken (10
on a critical hit) whenever it drains abilities.
If the amount of healing is more than the damage the
BONE OOZEcreature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit
points for 1 hour.
Bone Meld (Ex): Once per round, a bone ooze can attempt
to absorb the skeleton of an engulfed creature into its own
mass, pulling the bones out through the flesh. The victim
must make a successful Fortitude save (DC 35) or die. After
1d3 rounds, the bone ooze leaves behind the fleshy parts of
the victim and any treasure he or she carried.
Engulf (Ex): A bone ooze can simply bowl over Huge or
smaller creatures as a standard action. This attack affects as
many opponents as the creature’s body can cover. Each
target can make either an attack of opportunity against the
bone ooze or a Reflex save (DC 35) to avoid being engulfed.
A successful saving throw indicates that the target has been
pushed back or aside (target’s choice) as the ooze moves forward. A bone ooze cannot make a slam attack during a
round in which it attempts to engulf, but each creature
engulfed is considered grappled and trapped within the
bone ooze’s body. Such a creature takes automatic slam, ability drain, and wounding damage upon being engulfed and
each succeeding round that it remains trapped. In the next
round after engulfing, the bone ooze can attempt a bone
meld attack.
Wounding (Ex): Because of the bone shards the creature’s body contains, a bone ooze’s slam or engulf attack
causes a wound that bleeds for 5 points of damage per round
thereafter, in addition to the attack’s normal damage. Multiple wounds from the creature result
in cumulative bleeding
loss (two wounds
for 10
points of damage per round, and so on). The bleeding can be
stopped only by a successful Heal check (DC 15) or the
application of a cure spell or some other healing spell (heal,
healing circle, or the like).
Blindsight (Ex): A bone ooze is blind, but blindsight
allows it to maneuver and fight as well as a sighted creature.
Through this ability, it can discern objects and creatures
within 60 feet. The bone ooze usually does not need to make
Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Ooze Traits: A bone ooze is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing.
It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.
BRAXAT
Large Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 10d8+50 (95 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Huge greatclub +16/+11 melee and gore +10 melee
Damage: Huge greatclub 2d6+9, gore 1d8+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Breath weapon, mind blast, psionics, spelllike abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 10/+1, telepathy
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +8, Will +10
Abilities: Str 23, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 15, Wis 12, Cha 11
Skills: Intimidate +9, Jump +11, Listen +12, Spot +13,
Wilderness Lore +10
Feats: Expertise (B), Improved Bull Rush, Improved
Disarm, Improved Trip, Iron Will, Power Attack (B),
Weapon Focus (greatclub)
Climate/Terrain: Any desert or mountains
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–6),
warband (7–12), or tribe (20–80)
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: By character class
Braxats are violent, nocturnal hunters that
stalk mountainous and desert regions. These
dangerous, evil humanoids prey exclusively
on intelligent beings, whom they take
great pleasure in torturing, killing,
and eating. Their taste for humanoid
flesh can take them deep into civilized lands, where prey is plentiful
and easy to catch.
A braxat is a hulking, bipedal, lizardlike humanoid that towers over many giants
at its full adult height of 15 feet. Its features are a
37
BRAXAT
JJ38
combination of those of a rhinoceros and a spiny beetle. The
top of its head and its back are lined with thick, horncovered plates, and a single, massive horn juts up from
between its nostrils.
Braxats respect neither law nor authority, and they fear no
one. Their awesome strength, psionic abilities, and damage
reduction make them nearly unstoppable, and it is not
uncommon for a single band of them to wipe out several
humanoid settlements in the course of a year.
Occasionally a few survivors from braxat raids band
together and try to hunt the creatures down, but rarely do
they succeed in exacting vengeance. Experienced adventurers have been known to hunt braxats for sport,
pitting their experience and cleverness
against the creatures’ raw cunning and
psionic abilities. As such hunters
have discovered to their dismay,
braxats are quite proficient at protecting themselves with
deadly traps and ambushes.
Most such hunts end in victory for the braxats, but
now and then one is successful, yielding a few
braxat-horn trophies to
the hunters. These horns
have no value in themselves, but artists sometimes carve intricate sculptures on them and sell them
as art objects.
Braxats speak Giant, and a few
of the more civilized ones
make the effort to learn Common as well.
COMBAT
Braxats relish the hunt.
They delight in their victims’ fear and like to prolong the agony
of their prey by stalking it for long periods, using their
telepathy to create false hopes, and then crushing those
hopes with new ambushes. Alternatively, braxats may send
their victims telepathic taunts, detailing the grisly fate that
awaits them after capture.
In combat, braxats are cruel and cunning. They prefer to
soften up opponents with mind blasts and psionic assaults
before closing in for the kill. They usually save their breath
weapons for particularly stubborn foes. Once the opponents are damaged, the braxats wade into combat with
their greatclubs.
Breath Weapon (Su): A braxat can breathe a 30-foot-long
cone of cold for 3d8 points of cold damage (Reflex save DC
20 half ). Once it has used its breath weapon, the creature
must wait 1d4 rounds before it can do so again.
Mind Blast (Sp): This mind-numbing blast extends from
the braxat in a 30-foot-long cone. Anyone caught in the area
must succeed at a Will save (DC 15) or be stunned for 3d4
rounds. (When using the Psionics Handbook, replace this ability with the mind blast attack mode, as noted below.)
Psionics (Sp): At will—dimension door, mind blank. Caster
(or manifester) level 8th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Attack/Defense Modes: mind thrust, mind blast/thought shield,
empty mind.
Spell-Like Abilities (Sp): At will—blink; 1/day—
confusion, feeblemind. Caster level 8th; save DC
10 + spell level.
Telepathy (Su): A braxat can
communicate telepathically with
any creature within one mile that
has a language.
BRAXAT SOCIETY
Braxats live in a tribal society in
which males and females have
equal social status and access
to leadership positions. Each
tribal leader must prove his or
her worthiness annually in a
ritual combat with a single
challenger who has earned
the right of contest through
successful raiding over the
past year.
Young braxats are trained to
fight from the time they can
stand. Deadly combat between
young braxats over potential
mates, lairs, or treasure is encouraged to ensure that only the
strongest and cleverest survive to reproduce.
Once a young braxat is
deemed worthy to join a warband,
that group becomes his or her second family. Switching to
a different warband occurs only rarely—usually when
most of a band has been killed in battle. Aggression
between bandmates is strictly forbidden, since cooperation is vital to a successful hunt. Killing a bandmate is
punishable by the immediate execution of both the
offender and his or her family.
BRAXAT CHARACTERS
Because of the braxat’s affinity for hunting, its favored
class is ranger, although some braxats prefer to take levels
in barbarian or fighter. Evil druid braxats are rare, but not
unknown.
A braxat PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its
class level + 16. Thus, a 1st-level braxat ranger has an ECL of
17 and is the equivalent of a 17th-level character.
BRAXATBREATHDRINKER
Medium-Size Elemental (Air, Evil)
Hit Dice: 8d8+24 (60 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: Fly 80 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Wind scythe +6 melee
Damage: Wind scythe 2d4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear gaze, steal breath
Special Qualities: Air mastery, DR 10/+1, elemental traits,
invisibility
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +8, Will +3
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +12, Move Silently +8, Search +12, Spot +7,
Wilderness Lore +9
Feats: Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative, Track
Climate/Terrain: Temperate land or underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 9–16 HD (Large); 17–24 (Huge)
The breathdrinker is a dreadful elemental that feeds on air
extracted from the lungs of living creatures. How it actually derives sustenance from such a source is unknown,
but the cruel monster seems to take great delight in stealing the breath of its helpless victims.
The breathdrinker is normally invisible, except when
attacking. When it does become visible, it roughly mimics
the form of its chosen victim, appearing as a misty,
translucent duplicate. Its eyes resemble tiny, red spheres
of light.
Most breathdrinkers reside on the Elemental Plane of
Air. Occasionally, a breathdrinker summoned to the Material Plane by a spellcaster for a specific task (most often the
slaying of a specific target) decides to stay on after completing the assignment. A creature that chooses this course
nearly always does so because it enjoyed its task and wishes
to continue bringing death and destruction.
Breathdrinkers speak Common and Auran.
COMBAT
A breathdrinker lurks invisibly most of the time, waiting
for prey to wander near. It normally selects a single creature as a victim, then spends some time stalking and
watching its quarry before deciding on the best method
of approach. Often, it simply waits for its chosen prey to
fall asleep before attempting to steal its breath. Alternatively, it may first attempt to render the creature helpless
with its gaze attack, then follow up with its steal breath
attack. The breathdrinker is single-minded to a fault—
once it selects a victim, it does not rest until it has fully
fed from that creature’s lungs. Unless the breathdrinker
is killed, it persists with its breath-stealing attacks until
its chosen victim dies, then flees to digest its meal (a
process that usually takes several days) before setting out
to hunt again.
If attacked by creatures other than the one it has
selected, the breathdrinker usually defends itself with a
wind scythe—a plane of pressurized air that it forms from
its own body. The creature does not use this attack against
its chosen victim, preferring to kill that creature entirely
through breath-stealing.
Fear Gaze (Su): Anyone within 30 feet of a breathdrinker who meets the creature’s glowing red eyes must
succeed at a Will saving throw (DC 16) or be paralyzed
with fear for 1d4 rounds.
Steal Breath (Su): As a full-round action, a breathdrinker can attempt to suck the air from the lungs of any
helpless creature within reach. The target must make a
successful Fortitude saving throw (DC 17) or take 1d6
points of Constitution damage. The target dies when his or
her Constitution score reaches 0. The breathdrinker heals
5 points of damage for each point of Constitution the
target loses, gaining any excess as temporary hit points. So
long as the target remains helpless, the breathdrinker continues to use this attack against that creature every round
until it dies.
Air Mastery (Ex): Any airborne creature takes a –1
penalty on attack and damage rolls made against a breathdrinker.
Elemental Traits (Ex): The breathdrinker is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to
critical hits or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Invisibility (Su): A breathdrinker can make itself
invisible at will as a free action. This ability functions like
an invisibility spell (caster level 8th), except that it lasts
until the breathdrinker ends the effect, either by choice or
by attacking.
39
BREATHDRINKER
AL40
BRONZE SERPENT
Huge Construct
Hit Dice: 16d10 (88 hp)
Initiative: +9
Speed: 50 ft., burrow 30 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 26 (–2 size, +9 Dex, +9 natural), touch 17, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Bite +17 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6+10 plus electricity
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 2d8+10, improved grab, shocking bite
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 10/+1, electric
healing, electricity resistance 10, SR 21
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +14, Will +6
Abilities: Str 25, Dex 28, Con —, Int —, Wis 13, Cha 3
Skills: Climb +15
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or cluster (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 17–32 HD (Huge); 33–48 HD
(Gargantuan)
First seen in
tropical lands,
bronze serpents
are golemlike guardians that resemble the
serpent gods whose temples they once
protected. Over the course of centuries,
the secret of the creatures’ construction has spread far
and wide, so now they
may appear anywhere.
A bronze serpent is a
20-foot-long snake built
of articulated bronze rings.
Its eyes glow blue-white, and its
powerful jaws are equipped with impressive fangs that drip
fat electrical sparks instead of venom.
A bronze serpent cannot speak, but it can understand
simple instructions in its creator’s language.
COMBAT
A bronze serpent usually concentrates its initial attacks on
the creatures that appear most vulnerable to its shocking
bite. Once it hits with that attack, it wraps its body around
the opponent, then continues biting while it constricts.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a
bronze serpent can crush a grabbed opponent, dealing
2d8+10 points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a bronze serpent hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself
with a bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to
start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack
of opportunity (grapple bonus +27). If it gets a hold, it can
also constrict in the same round. Thereafter, the creature
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the bronze serpent is not considered grappled).
In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals bite and
constrict damage.
Shocking Bite (Su): A bronze serpent’s bite deals
1d8+16 points of electricity damage in addition to the
normal bite damage. The creature receives a +3 bonus on
attack rolls against any opponent that is made out of
metal, wearing metal armor, or carrying a a significant
amount of metal.
Construct Traits: A bronze serpent is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires
a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The creature
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage,
ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. It
cannot heal itself but can be healed through repair or
through its electric healing ability. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A bronze serpent has darkvision (60-foot range).
Electric Healing (Ex): Because of the bronze serpent’s
electrical affinity, any electricity attack directed at it cures 1
point of damage for each 3 points of damage it would otherwise deal. The creature gets no saving throw against electricity effects.
CONSTRUCTION
A bronze serpent’s body is constructed from 1,000 pounds
BRONZE
SERPENTof bronze. The creator must be at least 16th level and able to
cast arcane spells. Completing the ritual drains 4,000 XP
from the creator and requires the spells geas/quest, limited
wish, polymorph any object, and shocking grasp.
The serpent costs 200,000 gp to create, including 1,500 gp
for the body. Assembling the body requires a successful
Craft (armorsmithing) or Craft (weaponsmithing) check
(DC 25).
CATOBLEPAS
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 6d8+30 (57 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 19 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Tail slam +10 melee, or death ray +3 ranged touch
Damage: Tail slam 1d6+12 plus stun
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Death ray, stun
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., scent
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +3, Will +6
Abilities: Str 26, Dex 13, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
Skills: Jump +10, Listen +3, Spot +3, Wilderness Lore +3
Climate/Terrain: Any marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, or family (3)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: 1/10 coins, 50% goods, 50% items
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 7–12 HD (Huge); 13–18 HD (Gargantuan)
The catoblepas is a bizarre, loathsome creature that inhabits dismal swamps and marshes. It is thought to be the
result of a magical experiment gone terribly
wrong. Though it hunts for meat only occasionally, the creature’s
deadly nature is
legendary.
The body of a
catoblepas resembles that of
a bloated buffalo, and its
legs are stumpy, like those of
a pygmy elephant or a hippopotamus. Its muscular tail,
which it can move with blinding speed, ends in a chitinous
knob. The head is perched upon
a long, weak neck that can barely support its weight, so the creature tends to
hold its head very low to the ground. The face looks like
that of a warthog, but uglier.
Catoblepases mate for life, and when more than one is
encountered, the group is either a mated pair or (10%
chance) a family consisting of a mated pair with a single offspring. The juvenile catoblepas in such a group has 3d8+15
HD (28 hp) and does not fight, nor does it have any of the
adult creature’s special attacks.
Catoblepases do not collect treasure. Any valuables in
their vicinity are there because previous victims dropped
them. The creature’s lair is usually an area that offers both
shelter and firm ground, hidden by by tall reeds or marsh
grasses that the catolepas is canny enough not to consume.
An adult catoblepas has little to fear from other marsh
denizens, but its young are vulnerable to predators.
COMBAT
Normally, the catoblepas is a meandering grazer, wandering
the marsh in search of the most succulent grasses and
weeds. But once a month, usually under the light of a full
moon, it hunts for meat to round out its diet of reeds and
grasses. Usually it dines on easy prey such as fish, marsh
birds, eels, rats, large amphibians, snakes, and other marsh
animals during this period, but it is willing to hunt larger
creatures if necessary.
The creature makes full use of its reach when attacking
with its tail, and it never tries to engage more than one
enemy at a time. It usually reserves its death ray attack
for self-defense. A pair of catoblepases try to flank a
single target and slay it before moving on to another.
Death Ray (Su): The catoblepas can project a thin,
green ray up to 160 feet from its bloodshot eyes. Any
living creature struck by this ray must make a Fortitude
save (DC 18) or die instantly. Even on a success, the target
takes 5d6 points of damage. After striking one target, the
ray dissipates, and the attack cannot be used again for
1d4 rounds.
Stun (Ex): Any living creature struck by the catoblepas’s
tail must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 18) or be stunned
for 1 round. (A stunned character cannot act and loses any Dexterity bonus
to Armor Class. An
attacker gets a +2 bonus on
attack rolls against a stunned opponent.)
Success indicates that the target takes only the normal
damage for the attack.
Scent (Ex): A catoblepas can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
41
CATOBLEPAS
LGW42
CELESTIAL
The Outer Planes that celestials call home foster a variety
of good creatures. The goodness of celestials is of a quality
and intensity that makes many a paladin feel diminished
and inadequate.
Evil creatures in general and fiends in particular are anathema to celestials.
They may not
spend all their
waking hours rooting out tanar’ri and
baatezu from every
corner of the multiverse, but when confronted by fiends
of any sort, they
seldom back down.
Celestials are often
involved in prolonged wars against
fiends of various
types, and armies of celestials occasionally take the
battle to their
e n e m i e s .
Though celestials are
generally peaceloving creatures, they
are also terrible foes.
All celestials have comely looks, though their actual
appearances vary widely. Guardinals, the type presented here,
tend to have both humanoid and animal characteristics.
Celestials speak Celestial, Infernal, and Draconic.
COMBAT
Most celestials are armed with a variety of nonlethal
attacks and special abilities, which they reserve primarily
for those rare occasions when they must fight or subdue
good beings. Against creatures of evil or beings who have
somehow aroused their wrath, celestials are willing to
unleash the full measure of their lethal, otherworldly powers. Most celestials have excellent skills in melee as well,
and they do not hesitate to take on their foes hand-tohand. For creatures that dislike killing, they are exceptionally good at it.
All celestials have the following characteristics.
Celestial Traits: A celestial can speak with any creature
that has a language as though using a tongues spell (caster
level 14th; always active). It is immune to electricity and
petrification attacks, and it has acid resistance 20 and cold
resistance 20. In addition, a celestial has low-light vision and
a +4 racial bonus on Fortitude saves against poison.
Outsider Traits: A celestial has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised
or resurrected.
GUARDINALS
The guardinals are
the people of Elysium, just as demons (tanar’ri) are
the people of the
Abyss. Most guardinals resemble beautiful, muscular humans
with noticeable animallike traits.
Guardinals aren’t
numerous. In Elysium, they tend to
live in small groups,
watching their home
plane for any sign of
trouble while roaming its
breathtaking landscape in nomadic
bands. They live simply, taking only what
they require from
the land.
Guardinals
have no tolerance for evil or
injustice. Most of those that leave Elysium do so to seek out
and address such wrongs. Thus, it is rare to find a guardinal
roaming the planes for pleasure.
CERVIDAL
The most common of the guardinals of Elysium are the
satyrlike cervidals. Their home, Amoria, is the uppermost
layer of that plane. Cervidals take their guardianship of
Amoria serioiusly and are rarely found elsewhere except in
times of great need.
A cervidal’s body is slim, muscular, and covered with
short, dark red fur. Aside from its regal bearing, the creature’s most striking feature is the pair of long, curved horns
atop its head. A cervidal has hooves instead of feet, but its
hands are like a human’s, except that the backs are protected
by hard plates of horn. This allows it to use its hands as
punching weapons to deliver effective slam attacks.
Cervidals are peaceful and slow to anger, but in times of
need they form the bulk of any guardinal army. One on one,
a cervidal is a match for any comparable baatezu or tanar’ri,
but cervidals seldom have the luxury of fighting an equal
number of opponents.
CELESTIALCombat
A cervidal’s horns are its favored weapon. It usually begins a
fight by charging. Thereafter, it uses its slam and butt attacks
to advantage in melee.
Charge (Ex): A cervidal can lower its head and charge an
opponent, striking with its deadly horns. In addition to the
normal benefits and hazards of a charge, this tactic allows
the cervidal to make a single butt attack that deals 1d8+6
points of damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—bless, command, detect
poison, light; 1/day—hold person, magic missile, suggestion.
Caster level 9th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Horn Powers (Su): A cervidal can deliver any of several
effects by a touch of its horns. The horns can negate any
poison or disease (as the spells neutralize poison and remove disease) in the creature touched, dispel an illusion (as a targeted
dispel magic spell, except that it affects only spells of the Illusion school and is automatically successful), or dismiss (as a
dismissal spell) a summoned, conjured, or extraplanar creature.
Each of these horn powers can be used at will as a standard
action. Except as noted, all these abilities function as the corresponding spells. Caster level 20th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Skills: Because of its powerful legs, a cervidal gains a +8
racial bonus on Jump checks.
LUPINAL
As the name implies, lupinals are half-human, half-wolf
creatures. They are constantly on the prowl for evil intrusions into their territory, be it Elysium or a piece of the
Material Plane that they have made their own. Lupinals are
more likely than cervidals to make their homes outside
Elysium and assist other beings in repelling evil incursions.
Perhaps because of their pack-based society, lupinals are
more lawful than other natives of Elysium. In group activities, they operate in close cooperation and perfect harmony.
Even solitary lupinals are rarely more than an hour away
from allies (or even closer, via ethereal jaunt).
At first glance, a lupinal might be mistaken for a werewolf, with its long muzzle, fur, and backward-bending
canine legs. But where lycanthropes are savage and animallike, lupinals are intelligent, regal, and poised—though they
are quick to anger and ferocious when aroused.
Combat
Lupinals are exceptionally skilled in combat. They use pack
tactics (such as surrounding opponents, chasing down enemies, and the aid another action) with great skill. Their
approach often involves ambush, deception, and misdirection as well.
Fear Aura (Ex): When a lupinal howls, every creature
within 600 feet (except other celestials) who can hear it must
make a Will saving throw (DC 16). On a failure, a creature
with 7 or fewer Hit Dice becomes panicked for 4d6 rounds;
one with 8 or more Hit Dice becomes shaken for 4d6
43
CELESTIAL
Cervidal Lupinal
Medium-Size Outsider (Good) Medium-Size Outsider (Good)
Hit Dice: 4d8+8 (26 hp) 8d8+8 (44 hp)
Initiative: +3 +5
Speed: 50 ft. 50 ft.
AC: 19 (+3 Dex, +2 leather armor, +4 natural), 20 (+5 Dex, +3 natural, +2 leather armor),
touch 13, flat-footed 16 touch 15, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 2 slams +8 melee and butt +6 melee 2 claws +14 melee and bite +9 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+4, butt 1d3+2 Claw 1d4+6, bite 1d6+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Charge, spell-like abilities Fear aura, improved grab, spell-like abilities,
trip
Special Qualities: Celestial traits, horn powers, outsider traits Celestial traits, dodge missiles, DR 20/+2,
outsider traits, scent
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +7 Fort +7, Ref +11, Will +10
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 17, Con 15, Int 12, Wis 17, Cha 16 Str 23, Dex 20, Con 13, Int 16, Wis 18, Cha 15
Skills: Balance +9, Concentration +8, Heal +8, Animal Empathy +13, Balance +16,
Intimidate +9, Jump +19, Spellcraft +7 Climb +17, Concentration +12, Hide +16,
Listen +17, Move Silently +16, Spot +17
Feats: Multiattack, Power Attack Alertness, Power Attack, Track
Climate/Terrain: Elysium or any forest Elysium or any forest, plain, or hills
Organization: Solitary, pair, or team (3–6) Solitary, pair, or pack (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 3 5
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Usually neutral good Usually neutral good
Advancement: 5–12 HD (Medium-size) 9–24 HD (Medium-size)44
rounds. Success leaves the creature unaffected. Once a creature has either been affected by this ability or made a successful save, it cannot be affected by that lupinal’s howl
again for 24 hours.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a lupinal hits an opponent that
is at least one size category smaller than itself with a bite
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +14). The creature has the
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the lupinal is not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—blink, blur, change self, darkness, ethereal jaunt; 3/day—cone of cold, cure light wounds, fly,
magic missile. Caster level 8th; save DC 12 + spell level.
Trip (Ex): A lupinal that hits with a bite attack can
attempt to trip the opponent as a free action (see Trip in
Chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook) without making a touch
attack or provoking an attack of opportunity. If the attempt
fails, the opponent cannot react to trip the lupinal.
Dodge Missiles (Ex): This ability operates like the
Deflect Arrows feat, except that the lupinal can dodge any
missile and it need not have its hands free. (The creature is
dodging, not deflecting.) This ability is usable three times
per round.
Scent (Ex): A lupinal can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
CHAIN GOLEM
Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 7d10 (38 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft. (can’t run)
AC: 21 (+3 Dex, +8 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 2 chain rakes +9 melee
Damage: Chain rake 1d8+4 plus wounding
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Chain barrier, wounding
Special Qualities: Construct traits, magic immunity,
resistance to ranged attacks
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +2
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 17, Con —, Int —, Wis 11, Cha 1
Feats: Dodge (B), Expertise (B), Improved Disarm (B),
Improved Trip (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 8–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–21
HD (Large)
Creations of the diabolical kytons (see the Monster Manual),
chain golems serve as bodyguards for devils and as
guardians of unholy places. Occasionally, one of these
creatures is selected to carry out a special mission. When a
chain golem appears on the Material Plane, it is usually
delivering or retrieving a message or an item of particular
interest to its kyton master.
The body of a chain golem is composed entirely of shifting chains that vary in size and shape, ranging from
extremely thin and razor-sharp to thick and mounted with
barbs, spikes, and blades. A chain golem clanks and
screeches continually as its chains slide around its body.
Because it has a mostly humanoid shape, it is often mistaken
for a kyton.
A chain golem always obeys its master’s commands to
the letter, sacrificing itself in the execution of its duties if
necessary. Should a chain golem’s master die, the creature
immediately becomes the servant of another kyton.
COMBAT
A chain golem typically uses its long reach to grab at foes
and knock them to the ground. Then it activates its vicious
chain barrier to shred the fallen creature’s flesh.
Chain Barrier (Ex): As a full-round action, a chain
golem can surround itself with a whirling, slicing shield
of chains, similar in effect to a
blade barrier spell. Anyone adjacent to
a chain barrier
must make a
successful
Reflex save
(DC 17) or
CHAIN
GOLEMtake 7d6 points of damage. Any creature or object entering
or passing through such a barrier automatically takes that
amount of damage. The chain barrier moves with the
golem and serves as one-half cover for it (+4 bonus to AC).
Maintaining the barrier once it has been activated is a
standard action.
Wounding (Ex): A wound resulting from a chain golem’s
chain rake attack bleeds for an additional 2 points of damage
per round thereafter. Multiple wounds from such attacks
result in cumulative bleeding loss (two wounds for 4 points
of damage per round, and so on). The bleeding can be
stopped only by a successful Heal check (DC 10) or the
application of a cure spell or some other healing spell (heal,
healing circle, or the like).
Construct Traits: A chain golem is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The
creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. It cannot heal itself but can be healed through
repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A chain golem has
darkvision (60-foot range).
Magic Immunity (Ex): A chain golem is immune to
all spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects
except as follows. An electricity
effect slows it (as the slow
spell) for 2 rounds (no
saving throw). A fire
effect breaks any slow
effect on the chain
golem and cures 1 point
of damage for each 2 points
of damage it would otherwise
deal. A chain golem gets no saving
throw against fire effects.
Resistance to
Ranged Attacks (Su): A
chain golem gains a
+2 resistance bonus on saving throws
against ranged spells or ranged magical
attacks that specifically target it (except
ranged touch attacks).
CONSTRUCTION
Kytons are the only beings known to be capable of creating
chain golems, and they go to great lengths to keep the
method of construction a secret from all other creatures—
including other devils. Should another creature either
develop or acquire the method of chain golem creation, the
kytons would spare no effort to assassinate that individual
before he or she could spread the knowledge further.
CHAOS ROC
Colossal Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 33d10+297 (478 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft., fly 120 ft. (average)
AC: 25 (–8 size, +2 Dex, +21 natural), touch 4, flat-footed 23
Attacks: 2 claws +41 melee and bite +36 melee, or 2 wings
+41 melee
Damage: Claw 2d8+16, bite 4d6+8, wing 2d6+16
Space/Reach: 80 ft. by 40 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Prismatic spray, swallow whole
Special Qualities: DR 20/+3, SR 33
Saves: Fort +27, Ref +20, Will +12
Abilities: Str 42, Dex 15, Con 28, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 13
Skills: Spot +4, Wilderness Lore +3
Feats: Flyby Attack, Snatch (B)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm mountains
Organization: Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 22
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: 34–99 HD (Colossal)
Almost too
big to be believed, chaos
rocs are immense birds of
prey known for carrying off large animals
(such as cattle, horses, or
even elephants). These
enormous birds lair
in huge nests
made from
whole trees.
They prefer to dwell
high in the
mountains,
far from other
large creatures such
as rocs, dragons, and even other chaos rocs. This tactic
ensures that the food supply in any one area is not compromised too severely. Each chaos roc usually hunts within a
radius of about 10 miles around its own nest.
A chaos roc resembles a large eagle covered from head to
tail with brilliant, shimmering plumage in rainbow hues.
The creature measures 90 feet long from beak to tail, and its
wingspan can be as wide as 240 feet.
COMBAT
Chaos rocs prefer to attack on the wing, using their prismatic
spray ability to blind prey before attempting to snatch it up.
45
CHAOS ROC
AW46
Any additional damage done by the spray effect simply
makes the snatch attempt easier.
Prismatic Spray (Su): A chaos roc can emit a spray of colored light from its eyes at will. The effect is like that of the
spell (caster level 20th; save DC 27), except that the range is
105 feet, and only the colors red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
and indigo are present (roll 1d6 instead of 1d8 on the table
given for prismatic spray in the Player’s Handbook).
Swallow Whole (Ex): A chaos roc can swallow a
snatched opponent that is Huge or smaller by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +65). Once inside the
roc, the opponent takes 2d8+12 points of bludgeoning
damage and 1d8 points of acid damage per round from the
bird’s gizzard. A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of the gizzard and return to the
roc’s beak, where another successful grapple check is
needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can
try to cut its way out with either claws or a light piercing or
slashing weapon. Dealing at least 25 points of damage to the
gizzard (AC 20) in this way creates an opening large enough
to permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits,
muscular action closes the hole; thus, another swallowed
opponent must cut its own way out. A chaos roc’s gizzard
can hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128 Small or
smaller creatures.
Feats: A creature that is flung by a chaos roc after being
snatched travels 100 feet and takes 10d6 points of damage. If
the chaos roc is flying, the creature takes this damage or the
appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
CLOAKED APE
Medium-Size Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 4d10+4 (26 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 40 ft. (poor)
AC: 16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 2 claws +4 melee and bite –1 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6, bite 1d6
Special Attacks: Improved grab
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 5/silver,
fast healing 3, low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +2
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 3, Wis 12, Cha 5
Skills: Climb +9, Listen +3, Spot +3, Tumble +4,
Wilderness Lore +3
Feats: Flyby Attack
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest
Organization: Solitary, pair, or pack (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: 50% coins and 50% goods (no items)
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size); 9–12 HD (Large)
Cloaked apes inhabit the deep forests of tropical and subtropical lands, where they glide through the treetops in
search of food. These diurnal foragers subsist primarily on a
diet of fruit and nuts, though they do occasionally eat small
animals that they manage to ambush from above.
The cloaked ape is named for the flaps of skin that
stretch from its wrists to its ankles. When not extended for
gliding through the treetops, these skin flaps resemble the
folds of a cloak.
COMBAT
Cloaked apes are territorial, but they rarely attack unless
they significantly outnumber the intruders. Otherwise they
stay in the treetops, hooting and hurling loose branches and
half-eaten fruit, berries, and nuts at their foes.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a cloaked ape hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with both claw attacks, it deals
normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus
+4). The creature has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its claws to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the cloaked ape is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check
it makes during successive rounds automatically deals
damage for two claw attacks.
Fast Healing (Ex): A
cloaked ape regains lost
hit points at the rate of 3
per round. Fast healing does
not restore hit points lost from
starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not
allow the cloaked ape
to regrow or reattach
lost body parts.
Scent (Ex): A cloaked
ape can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and
track by sense
of smell.
CLOAKED
APE
MDClockwork horrors are intelligent, arachnidlike constructs that live as a hierarchical collective. They exist
solely to strip entire worlds of worked and raw metals,
which they use to produce more horrors. These activities
take clockwork horrors into areas where metal can be
found, from underground mines to civilized areas where
processed metal is often readily available. Clockwork horrors ignore nonmechanical creatures unless such beings
47
CLOCKWORK
HORROR
CLOCKWORK HORROR
Electrum Horror Gold Horror
Small Construct Small Construct
Hit Dice: 4d10 (22 hp) 8d10 (44 hp)
Initiative: +2 +2
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft.
AC: 19 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), 22 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +9 natural),
touch 12, flat-footed 18 touch 13, flat-footed 20
Attacks: Razor saw +5 melee, or pressure dart +5 ranged Razor saw +9 melee
Damage: Razor saw 1d8+1, pressure dart 2d4+1 Razor saw 1d10+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — Lightning bolt
Special Qualities: Construct traits, electricity immunity, Construct traits, electricity immunity,
linked mind, spell vulnerability, SR 17 linked mind, spell vulnerability, SR 18
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +2, Will +3 Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +5
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 13, Con —, Int 5, Wis 14, Cha 5 Str 14, Dex 15, Con —, Int 9, Wis 16, Cha 11
Feats: Point Blank Shot (B), Precise Shot (B) Cleave (B), Power Attack (B), Sunder (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Pair or component (3–8) Module (1–2 plus 3–12 electrum horrors)
Challenge Rating: 4 5
Treasure: 50% coins, 50% goods (gems only) 50% coins, 50% goods (gems only)
Alignment: Always lawful evil Always lawful evil
Advancement: — —
Platinum Horror Adamantine Horror
Small Construct Small Construct
Hit Dice: 12d10 (66 hp) 16d10 (88 hp)
Initiative: +3 +8
Speed: 40 ft. 50 ft.
AC: 25 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +11 natural), 28 (+1 size, +4 Dex, +13 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 22 touch 15, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Razor saw +13 melee Razor saw +18 melee
Damage: Razor saw 1d12+4 Razor saw 2d10+7
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Lightning bolt Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Construct traits, electricity immunity, Construct traits, electricity immunity,
linked mind, spell vulnerability, SR 20 linked mind, spell vulnerability, SR 22
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +9 Fort +5, Ref +9, Will +12
Abilities: Str 16, Dex 17, Con —, Int 13, Wis 20, Cha 15 Str 20, Dex 19, Con —, Int 17, Wis 24, Cha 21
Feats: Cleave (B), Great Cleave (B), Power Attack (B), Cleave (B), Great Cleave (B), Improved Initiative
Sunder (B) (B), Power Attack (B), Sunder (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Series (1 plus 1–2 gold horrors Assembly (1 plus 1–2 platinum horrors, 3–4
and 4–16 electrum horrors) gold horrors, and 5–20 electrum horrors)
Challenge Rating: 7 9
Treasure: 50% coins, 50% goods (gems only) 50% coins, 50% goods (gems only)
Alignment: Always lawful evil Always lawful evil
Advancement: — —48
pose a threat or obviously possess metal. The horrors’
searches are methodical and efficient, resulting in the
destruction of nearly everything in their path. An
army of horrors can devastate an entire nation in a
matter of weeks.
A clockwork horror appears as a four-legged,
mechanical arachnid
with a body about
2 feet in diameter. It is made of a
base metal (such
as iron) overlaid
with a thin patina of precious
or semiprecious
metal. A large
gem is embedded
in the creature’s
brow. A single
razor saw is situated near the front
of its head where
a mouth would
normally be located. The more
powerful clockwork horrors are
more fantastically designed and decorated than the
lesser ones. Servant clockwork horrors with overlays of less
precious metals are known to exist, but these serve the hierarchy primarily as laborers.
Clockwork horrors communicate in their own language
of mechanical sounds. The linked mind that they share
allows for instant communication among individual horrors
within 10 miles of each other.
Logic indicates that since the horrors are mechanical
beings, someone or something must have created them.
What happened to that being is unknown. Some sages theorize that the adamantine horror rebelled against and slew its
creator, then devised the other types of clockwork horrors
to serve as its armies.
COMBAT
Clockwork horrors attack their foes with calculated, merciless precision. Lesser horrors unswervingly follow the
orders of their superiors, fighting to the death if so commanded. In battle, clockwork horrors swarm around foes
and whittle away at them while calling for reinforcements. A clockwork horror’s weaponry is a part of its
being, so it cannot be disarmed. When it dies, the gem in
its brow disintegrates, and its body fuses into a mass of
melted metal.
All clockwork horrors share the following qualities.
Construct Traits: A clockwork horror is immune to
mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning,
disease, death effects, necromantic effects, and any
effect that requires a Fortitude save unless it
also works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical
hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death
from massive damage.
It cannot heal itself but can be
healed through
repair. It cannot be
raised or resurrected.
A clockwork horror has darkvision
(60-foot range).
Linked Mind (Ex):
All clockwork horrors
within 10 miles of a
gold, platinum, or
adamantine horror
are in constant communication. If one is
aware of a particular danger, they all are. If one in a particular group is not flat-footed,
none of them are. No clockwork horror
in such a group is considered flanked unless they all are.
Spell Vulnerability (Ex): A clockwork horror is susceptible to the shatter spell, which blinds it for 1d4+1 rounds.
ELECTRUM HORROR
Electrum horrors are the shock troops of the clockwork
horror collective. They are sent in to scout out areas, assess
potential resistance, and overcome any opposition.
Combat
Electrum horrors advance into combat in precise battle
lines, with the individual horrors spaced about 10 feet apart.
They open fire with volleys of pressure darts. Upon closing
with the enemy, some continue firing darts at perceived
spellcasters or opponents using ranged weapons, while
others slice away at nearby foes with their razor-sharp saws.
After a battle, additional electrum horrors scavenge the
area, retrieving fallen companions and any abandoned
weapons for smelting down and making new horrors.
GOLD HORROR
Gold horrors are the commanders of the clockwork
horror armies. They supervise the electrums and other
lesser horrors, ensuring that the orders of their superiors
are obeyed.
CLOCKWORK
HORRORCombat
Gold horrors fight from behind a line of electrum guards,
shooting lightning bolts at their foes. In melee, a gold horror
strikes at an enemy’s weapon to destroy it. Against magic
weapons and items, a gold horror’s razor saw functions as a
+2 weapon.
Lightning Bolt (Sp): Once every 2 rounds, the monster can
generate a lightning bolt 5 feet wide and 40 feet long that
deals 6d6 points of damage. A successful Reflex save (DC 13)
halves the damage.
PLATINUM HORROR
Platinum horrors are the generals and governors of all the
lesser clockwork horrors. It is they who identify targets,
devise strategies, and decide how best to deploy other horrors to achieve their goals.
Combat
In combat, platinum horrors fire lightning bolts at opponents
before closing with them. In melee, they use their razor
saws to sunder the weapons and armor of their enemies.
Against magic weapons and items, a platinum horror’s razor
saw functions as a +3 weapon.
Lightning Bolt (Sp): A platinum horror’s lightning bolt ability produces more powerful lightning bolts than the gold
horror can emit. Once every 2 rounds, the platinum horror
can fire a lightning bolt 5 feet wide and 80 feet long, dealing
12d6 points of electricity damage. A successful Reflex save
(DC 15) halves the damage.
ADAMANTINE
An adamantine horror is the supreme leader of the entire
clockwork horror collective. Only one is believed to
exist.
The adamantine horror directs the harvesting of metal
and the creation of new horrors. It alone decides which
new horrors to make; thus it controls the composition of the
collective. The adamantine horror holds the secret of animating a newly built horror body.
The adamantine horror’s motives in its aggressive campaign to grow the collective are unknown. Some sages
speculate that it strives to destroy rival cultures; others
claim it has acquired a living thing’s drive to reproduce.
Whatever its motives, the creature is a master at destroying other civilizations.
Combat
An adamantine horror devastates foes with its spell-like
abilities from afar. In melee, it slashes through its enemies
with its razor saw. Against magic weapons and items, an
adamantine horror’s razor saw functions as a +5 weapon.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—disintegrate, implosion,
Mordenkainen’s disjunction. Caster level 14th; save DC 15 +
spell level.
CLOUD RAY
Colossal Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 30d10+270 (435 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: Fly 40 ft. (poor)
AC: 8 (–8 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 3, flat-footed 7
Attacks: Bite +37 melee and tail slam +32 melee
Damage: Bite 3d10+15, tail slam 2d8+7
Space/Reach: 100 ft. by 60 ft./5 ft. (20 ft. with tail)
Special Attacks: Swallow whole
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., levitate, low-light
vision, protection from arrows, telekinesis
Saves: Fort +26, Ref +18, Will +10
Abilities: Str 40, Dex 13, Con 28, Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 11
Skills: Hide +6*, Listen +5, Spot +5
Feats: Flyby Attack, Snatch (B)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm desert, plains,
marsh, and hills
Organization: Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 31–60 HD (Colossal)
Cloud rays are among the most majestic of all flying creatures. They do not truly fly; instead, they levitate while propelling themselves with their wing-flaps.
A cloud ray has an enormous, flattened, triangular body
that resembles that of an aquatic ray, but on an immensely
larger scale. Its vast body is mottled in shades of dark blue
and gray, with similar, lighter colors underneath. Along
each side of its body is a long, wing-shaped piece of muscular tissue, which it uses for maneuvering and propulsion.
Its abdomen tapers into a long, agile tail, called a zip, which
is covered with bony spines.
With the possible exception of dragons, cloud rays have
no known predators. They typically prey on rocs, pegasi,
manticores, hippogriffs, griffons, and other large flying creatures. Cloud rays do not deliberately seek out human prey,
but they have been known to devour whole villages when
the opportunities presented themselves.
COMBAT
Most often, a cloud ray attacks simply because it is hungry. It
dives on its prey and tries to snatch it up in its 20-foot-wide
mouth, then flies off to swallow it.
In melee, a cloud ray can use its Snatch feat, or it can slap a
foe with its tail. When it does the latter, the tail moves so fast
that it creates a thundrous sound, like the crack of a whip.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A cloud ray can swallow a snatched
opponent that is Huge or smaller by making a successful
grapple check (grapple bonus +61). The cloud ray, however,
has no appreciable stomach. Instead it has a long throat, the
whole length of which is equipped with teeth for grinding
49
CLOUD RAY50
and tearing food. Its throat empties directly into its intestines,
so the ray must chew its food thoroughly to ensure proper
digestion. Once inside the ray’s throat, the opponent takes
3d10+22 points of bludgeoning, slashing, and piercing
damage per round from its teeth and muscular contractions.
A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to
climb out of the throat and return to the ray’s mouth, where
another successful grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with
either claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at
least 25 points of damage to the throat (AC 20) in this way
creates an opening large enough to permit escape. Once a
single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the
hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own
way out. A cloud ray’s throat can hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32
Medium-size, or 128 Small or smaller creatures.
Levitate (Ex): The cloud ray controls its altitude by generating and manipulating lighter-than-air gases inside its
body. This ability enables it to ascend 20 feet per round or,
by neutralizing the levitating gases and letting gravity take
its course, descend as much as 500 feet per round. In spite
of its immense bulk, the ray can pull out of such a dive
instantly simply by levitating again.
Protection from Arrows (Su): This ability allows a cloud
ray to resist most ranged attacks. It works like a protection
from arrows spell (DR 10/+2 against projectiles), except that
the effect cannot be dispelled and it does not discharge after
absorbing a certain amount of damage.
Telekinesis (Su): Lacking any sort of hands or paws, the
cloud ray instead uses telekinesis to manipulate objects.
This ability works like the telekinesis spell (caster level 5th),
so the creature can lift or throw 125 pounds.
Skills: Thanks to its coloration, a cloud ray has a +16 racial
bonus on Hide checks. *When it tires of drifting through
the sky, it settles to the ground for rest. Through a combination of telekinesis and moving its great wing-flaps, it covers
itself with dust, dirt, rocks, logs, uprooted bushes, and whatever else is nearby. While it is thus camouflaged, its Hide
modifier rises to +32. The ray may rest on the ground thus
covered for a few hours or a few weeks.
Feats: A creature that is flung by a cloud ray after being
snatched travels 100 feet and takes 10d6 points of damage. If
the cloud ray is flying, the creature takes this damage or the
appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
COROLLAX
Tiny Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 1d10 (5 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 10 ft., fly 60 ft. (good)
AC: 17 (+2 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Claw +6 melee
Damage: Claw 1d3–5
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Color spray
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 5/silver, low-light
vision, SR 12
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +2
Abilities: Str 1, Dex 17, Con 11, Int 2, Wis 14, Cha 16
Skills: Listen +4, Spot +4
Feats: Weapon Finesse (claws)
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest
Organization: Solitary, pair, or swarm (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 1/2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 2–6 HD (Tiny); 7–9 HD (Small)
Corollaxes are mischievous and curious insectivores that
dwell in dense jungles in tropical and subtropical climates.
They typically nest in large colonies that span several
closely placed trees.
These colorful creatures are very curious and quite social.
They can provide the unknowing traveler with a great deal
of companionship and amusement—at least until startled.
At that point, their natural defensive reaction erupts, and
chaos usually ensues.
A corollax has a gray-black, curved beak and black eyes.
Its plumage varies in color, but a typical male’s feathers are
COROLLAX
JEa mixture of bright red, orange, and yellow, and a female’s
are either brown or gray.
TRAINING A COROLLAX
A corollax can be trained with a successful Handle Animal
check (DC 23) to accept a particular creature (not necessarily the one who made the check) as a member of its flock.
Any bird so trained does not use its color spray attack
against the designated individual.
These birds are also natural mimics. With a successful
Handle Animal check (DC 23), a corollax can be trained to
repeat a particular phrase. Each bird is capable of remembering up to nine different phrases, though each phrase requires
a separate Handle Animal check. The birds don’t seem to comprehend what they say, however, and many humanoids later
come to regret teaching the precocious mimics to talk—particularly when they can’t get the creatures to shut up.
COROLLAX COMPANIONS
Because it is a social creature, a corollax can sometimes be persuaded to accept humanoid companionship on a long-term
basis. If a character offers food and makes a successful Handle
Animal check (DC 25 if
the character has not
previously frightened or
abused the bird, or DC
30 otherwise), the corollax
considers the character a
desirable companion and
accompanies him or her
willingly in all travels. A
corollax adopted in this
manner refuses to leave
the character’s side so
long as food, grooming,
and lots of attention are provided. A well-treated corollax
makes every effort to rejoin its companion if forcibly separated, and the
companion receives a +2 circumstance
bonus on all subsequent Handle Animal
checks involving the bird. If the corollax is mistreated, it leaves and attempts to find its own way home.
COMBAT
Corollaxes are not aggressive and do not attack unless
someone attacks or harasses them first. If disturbed, a
corollax screeches and flies about, unleashing its color
spray attack. If forced into melee, the bird combines both
claws into a single attack.
Color Spray (Su): Once per round, a corollax can unleash
a vivid cone of clashing colors. This ability works like a color
spray spell (caster level 1st; save DC 13). The creature is
immune to its own color spray attack and to those of others
of its kind.
CORPSE GATHERER
Gargantuan Undead
Hit Dice: 30d12 (195 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft., burrow 10 ft.
AC: 12 (–4 size, –2 Dex, +8 natural), touch 4, flat-footed 12
Attacks: Slam +23/+18/+13 melee
Damage: Slam 2d12+18/19–20
Space/Reach: 20 ft. by 20 ft./20 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, ingest corpses, swallow
whole
Special Qualities: Desanctifying aura, DR 10/+2, soulbinding, SR 30, undead traits, zombie-spawn
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +17
Abilities: Str 34, Dex 7, Con —, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 15
Skills: Climb +14, Jump +14, Listen +20, Search +16, Spot +18
Feats: Cleave, Improved Critical (slam), Improved
Initiative, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or cluster (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 31–60 HD (Colossal)
A corpse gatherer is an animated graveyard empowered by a mean intelligence and a greed for more bodies.
It exists only to increase its own
size and power by devouring
more dead bodies. It seeks
corpses everywhere, from
cemeteries to battlefields to
scenes of natural disasters.
A corpse gatherer appears
roughly humanoid, but its
immense body is made up of
corpses, tombstones, and
grave earth. From a distance, the creature resembles
a hulking giant made of
earth and stones, but upon
closer inspection, a viewer can detect the occasional dead
hand, head, or other appendage protruding from its form.
These creatures are thought to spawn from the burial of
a sentient undead creature (such as a vampire) in unconsecrated ground. The lingering taint of undeath somehow
permeates the earth, causing the entire graveyard—
corpses, tombstones, and all—to coalesce into a ravening
undead monster.
Corpse gatherers feast upon dead flesh, but they are
more than willing to create fresh corpses by slaying living
creatures. A single corpse gatherer has been known to
destroy several entire villages to sate its unceasing hunger.
51
CORPSE
GATHERER52
Though corpse gatherers are not themselves evil, their
undead taint extends to any living prey they devour. The
soul of a creature consumed by a corpse gatherer is trapped
within the latter’s body along with its corpse. Thus, the soul
cannot escape (so the creature cannot be raised or resurrected) until the corpse gatherer itself is destroyed.
COMBAT
A corpse gatherer fights by attempting to pound its opponents into mush. From time to time, it also grabs troublesome
opponents and stuffs them into its porous body (see Swallow
Whole, below). Those so absorbed are grasped and held fast
by the hands of the corpses that make up the gatherer.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a corpse gatherer hits an opponent its own size
or smaller with a slam attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple
bonus +39). If it gets a hold, it
can try to swallow the opponent in the next round. Alternatively, the corpse gatherer has
the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
hand to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but
the corpse gatherer is not considered grappled). In either case,
its next successful grapple check
deals automatic slam damage.
Ingest Corpses (Su): The
corpse gatherer increases its hit
points by adding bodies to its
form. It gains 5 hit points for every
corpse of a swallowed creature
that it absorbs. The corpse gatherer can exceed its normal hit
points in this manner, gaining any
excess as temporary hit points. Opponents
the creature has swallowed are not subject to ingestion until the round after they die.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A corpse gatherer can swallow a
grabbed opponent that is at least one size category smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple
bonus +39). The creature need not use its mouth to swallow;
it can merely stuff the opponent into any convenient portion of its porous body. Once inside the gatherer, the opponent takes 1d12+12 points of bludgeoning damage per round
from the roiling corpses, gravestones, and other objects
inside the creature’s body. A successful grapple check allows
the swallowed creature to extract itself from the hands of
the corpses inside the gatherer and return to the surface of
the gatherer’s body, where another successful grapple check
is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can
try to cut its way out with either claws or a light piercing or
slashing weapon. Dealing at least 25 points of damage to the
corpse gatherer (AC 20) in this way creates an opening large
enough to permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature
exits, the other nearby corpses close the hole; thus, another
swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A Gargantuan corpse gatherer can hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32 Mediumsize, or 128 Small or smaller creatures.
Desanctifying Aura (Su): A corpse gatherer projects a
continual field of negative energy in a 100-foot-radius emanation. The area within this field is under the effect of a
double-strength desecrate spell (caster level 15th), as if the
corpse gatherer were a permanent feature dedicated to its own deity. Each turning attempt within this area has
a –6 profane penalty. Further,
each undead creature in the area
(including the corpse gatherer) is
entitled to a +2 profane bonus on
its attack rolls, damage rolls and
saving throws, as well as +2 hit
points per HD. This aura lasts for 24
hours after the corpse gatherer has
passed through.
Soul Binding (Su): Creatures
slain and ingested by a corpse gatherer are affected as if by a soul bind
spell, so they cannot be restored to
life. Destroying the corpse gatherer
negates this effect. Corpses that
the creature devours without
having slain them itself are not
subject to soul binding.
Undead Traits: A corpse
gatherer is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects,
necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save unless it also works
on objects. It is not subject to critical hits, subdual
damage, ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death
from massive damage. A corpse gatherer cannot be raised, and
resurrection works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
Zombie-Spawn (Su): Upon reaching 0 hit points, the
corpse gatherer falls apart into its component corpses. The
creature’s animating force remains among the corpses that
formerly composed its body, converting them into zombies.
Upon its death, a corpse gatherer generates as many zombies
as it has Hit Dice (that is, a 30-HD corpse-gatherer becomes
thirty zombies). Unless circumstances dictate otherwise,
these are all Medium-size zombies. They function normally as
long as they remain in the desanctified area of the dead corpse
gatherer, but outside its effect they revert to normal corpses.
CORPSE
GATHERERCRIMSON DEATH
Medium-Size Undead (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 13d12 (84 hp)
Initiative: +9
Speed: Fly 30 ft. (perfect)
AC: 17 (Dex +5, deflection +2), touch 17, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 incorporeal touches +11 melee
Damage: Blood drain
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Blood drain, seize
Special Qualities: Incorporeal subtype, lift, undead traits
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +11, Will +10
Abilities: Str —, Dex 21, Con —, Int 17, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Concentration +14, Hide +21*, Intuit Direction +7,
Listen +20, Search +13, Spot +20
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes, Dodge,
Expertise, Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes (B),
Mobility, Spring Attack (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any marsh
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 14–26 HD
(Medium-size)
A crimson death is a
vaporous creature that
lives in marshes, on moors,
or any place that is subject to
frequent, thick fogs. To conceal its presence from the
general populace, a crimson
death usually carries the
bodies of its victims back to its
lair, which is a charnel-house
piled with the corpses and treasure
of its victims.
A crimson death resembles a
knot of fog with a vaguely humanoid shape, including arms and a
torso. Its lower body trails off into
indistinct vapor. The creature’s eyes glow
white, but it has no other facial features. After it
has fed, the blood of its victims stains its misty
body red.
COMBAT
A crimson death’s attack consists of extending a vaporous tendril and wrapping it around its opponent. The creature prefers
to attack from ambush, and it avoids physically powerful targets that might easily break free of its grasp.
Blood Drain (Ex): A crimson death drains blood, dealing
1d4 points of Constitution damage immediately upon seizing
an opponent with a tendril. Each round thereafter that the
opponent remains seized, the creature automatically deals
an additional 1d4 points of Constitution damage. The crimson death craves blood, so it usually presses its attack until it
can deal at least 12 points of Constitution damage.
Seize (Ex): When a crimson death makes a successful
incorporeal touch attack, one of its tendrils wraps around
the opponent. The two creatures are not considered grappled, but the opponent can break free with a successful
Escape Artist or grapple check (grapple bonus +11). Upon
seizing an opponent, the crimson death begins draining
blood (see above).
Incorporeal Subtype: A crimson death can be harmed
only by other incorporeal creatures, +1 or better magic
weapons, spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. The creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage
from a corporeal source, except for force effects or attacks
made with ghost touch weapons. A crimson death
can pass through solid objects, but not
force effects, at will. Its attacks ignore
natural armor, armor, and shields, but
deflection bonuses and force effects
work normally against them. A
crimson death always moves
silently and cannot be heard
with Listen checks if it doesn’t
wish to be.
Lift (Sp): As a free action,
a crimson death can telekinetically lift another creature
or an object weighing up to
300 pounds. This ability works
like the telekinesis spell (sustained
force version, caster level 12th),
except that it works only on an
opponent already seized by a tendril of the crimson death. Against a
struggling opponent, use of this ability requires a successful grapple
check (grapple bonus +11).
Undead Traits: A crimson death
is immune to mind-affecting effects,
poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and
any effect that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects. It is not
subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. A crimson death cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision
(60-foot range).
Skills: *A crimson death’s misty form makes it difficult to
spot in fog. Before feeding, the creature receives a +8 bonus
on Hide checks in smoky or foggy areas. After it has fed, the
bonus drops to +4 because of its red coloration.
53
CRIMSON
DEATH
JJ54
DARKTENTACLES
Large Aberration
Hit Dice: 9d8+27 (67 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 5 ft., swim 20 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16
Attacks: 12 slams +9 melee, or weapon +9/+4 melee and 11
light weapons +9 melee, or weapon +7/+2 melee and 11
weapons (at least one of which is not light) +7 melee
Damage: Slam 1d4+4, by weapon (damage bonus +4 for
primary hand and +2 for each off hand)
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 2d6+6, improved grab, spelllike abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., enhanced multiweapon
fighting, tentacle regeneration, tremorsense, weapon use
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +7
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 14, Wis 12, Cha 12
Skills: Concentration +11, Hide +14, Listen +6, Move
Silently +14, Spot +6
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Multidexterity, Multiweapon
Fighting
Climate/Terrain: Any marsh
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 10–18 HD (Large); 19–27 HD (Huge)
The darktentacles is a justly feared swamp
monster. Both intelligent and malicious,
it often leaves treasure from previous victims scattered about
to attract new prey. The
creature can flatten its
squishy body across
the ground so as to
be inconspicuous,
and it usually hides
in or near water.
A darktentacles
resembles an octopus with thirty-six
tentacles, each of which
can be up to 20 feet long.
Instead of suction cups, each of its
tentacles is lined with eyes. The creature uses some tentacles
for movement and others for combat, striking with
whichever tentacles are convenient.
This creature is capable of wielding weapons in its tentacles, and it often does so. It has no innate sense for
magic items, but it tends to select the most effective
weapons at its disposal. Because it hides so well, many
characters have no idea that a darktentacles is present
until abandoned weapons fly up from the ground and begin
attacking them.
A darktentacles speaks Common and Aquan.
COMBAT
When creatures approach, a darktentacles typically uses its
charm monster and hold monster powers first, concentrating
these attacks on foes who seem to be physically powerful.
Thereafter, it attacks anyone who comes within reach of its
tentacles. If the darktentacles manages to grab someone, it
uses its wall of force ability to keep any other opponents from
lending the victim assistance.
A darktentacles can use only three tentacles at once
against a Small or Medium-size opponent. Against a larger
foe, it can use three additional tentacles for each extra 5 feet
of face the opponent has, provided that it has the reach.
Against a Tiny or smaller opponent, the creature can use
only one tentacle. It can use a maximum of three tentacles
against all foes in any single 5-foot by 5-foot area.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a darktentacles can crush a grabbed opponent, dealing 2d6+6
points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a darktentacles hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +30; includes a +16 racial bonus
on grapple checks). If it gets a
hold, it can also constrict in
the same round. Thereafter, the darktentacles
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
tentacle to hold the
opponent (–20 penalty
on grapple check, but
the darktentacles is
not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple
check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals slam and
constrict damage.
Spell-Like Abilities:
5/day—hold monster; 3/day—charm
monster; 1/day—wall of force. Caster level 10th; save DC 11 +
spell level.
Enhanced Multiweapon Fighting (Ex): This ability
lessens the penalty for off-hand weapon use by 2 for both
primary and off hands. Combined with the Multidexterity and Multiweapon Fighting feats, this ability effectively negates all attack penalties for using one or more
light off-hand weapons.
DARKTENTACLESTentacle Regeneration (Ex): Foes can attack the tentacles of a darktentacles, but only when those appendages
are actually holding an opponent. A tentacle has an AC of
19 (touch 12) and can withstand 20 points of damage. The
loss of a tentacle does not harm the creature (that is, the
damage does not apply against its hit point total), and it
regrows the limb within a day.
Tremorsense (Ex): A darktentacles can automatically
sense the location of anything within 60 feet that is in contact with the ground.
Weapon Use (Ex): A darktentacles of Large size can
wield a melee weapon of up to Huge size in each tentacle. It
is proficient with all simple and martial melee weapons.
Skills: A darktentacles receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks.
DEATHBRINGER
Large Undead
Hit Dice: 30d12 (195 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 32 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +16 natural, +6 banded mail),
touch 10, flat-footed 31
Attacks: Heavy flail +16/+11/+6 melee and heavy flail +16
melee, or 2 slams +19 melee
Damage: Heavy flail 1d10+5/17–20, heavy flail 1d10+2/
17–20, slam 1d8+5
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Greater dispelling,
negative burst, trample 2d4+7
Special Qualities: Undead traits
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +12, Will +19
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 15, Con —,
Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 7
Skills: Intimidate +22,
Listen +26, Move
Silently +20, Spot +25
Feats: Ambidexterity,
Blind-Fight, Cleave, Great
Cleave, Improved Bull Rush,
Improved Critical (heavy flail),
Power Attack, Two-Weapon
Fighting, Weapon Focus
(heavy flail)
Climate/Terrain: Any land
and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair,
or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 17
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: 31–50 HD (Large);
51–70 HD (Huge); 71–90 HD (Gargantuan)
These powerful undead often lead undead armies assembled
by necromancers, liches, demons, devils, or any other evil
beings intent on inflicting pain and destruction on the
living. Deathbringers care not whom they serve; they care
only about inflicting widespread destruction.
A deathbringer is a hulking brute of humanoid shape. It
has waxy gray skin and a bald head with no external ears. Its
lips and eyelids appear to have been sewn shut with blue
thread. The creature wears banded mail and wields two
wickedly spiked heavy flails.
Deathbringers speak Common and either Abyssal or
Infernal.
COMBAT
A deathbringer uses little subtlety in battle, but whenever it can make a full attack, it attempts to trip its opponent. If tripped during its own attempt, it drops its flail
and attacks with its armored fists. When severely damaged, a deathbringer uses its negative burst power, centered on itself. This heals both the deathbringer and any
undead compatriots it has in the area while also harming
its opponents.
Greater Dispelling (Sp): A deathbringer can produce a
greater dispelling effect at will. Caster level 20th.
Negative Burst (Su): A deathbringer can release a
silent burst of negative energy at a range of up to 100 feet.
The burst has a 20-foot radius and deals 1d8+10 points of
negative energy damage to each living creature
in the area (Will DC 23 half ). Since undead
are powered by negative energy, this
effect heals the deathbringer and any
other undead within the area of as
much damage as it would otherwise
deal. Once a deathbringer
releases a negative burst,
it must wait 1d4 rounds
before it can do so again.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn
each round, a deathbringer
can trample opponents at
least one size category
smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d4+7 points of
bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt either an
attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a
Reflex save (DC 30) for half damage.
Undead Traits: A deathbringer is
immune to mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and
any effect that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects. It is not
subject to critical hits, subdual damage,
55
DEATHBRINGER56
ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from
massive damage. A deathbringer cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
DEMON
In the countless, nearly infinite realms of the Abyss,
demons grow numerous and varied. Though all embrace
the path of evil, the tanar’ri stand as the supreme villains
within the Abyssal hierarchy of iniquity. These creatures
are constantly in conflict with every force of good in the
universe, as well as with the lawful evil devils and baatezu
of the Nine Hells.
The abyssal maw, abyssal skulker, and abyssal ravager are
vicious but servile demons that can be found in the service
of more powerful demons, or of evil mortals who treat with
such beings. All three creatures speak Abyssal and
Common, though abyssal maws and abyssal ravagers speak
none too clearly, thanks to their low Intelligence scores and
toothy maws.
The jovoc, palrethee, jarilith, and kelvezu appear wherever their demonic masters see fit to make use of them, be
it the hidden reaches of their personal domains or out
among mortals on the Material Plane. The zovvut, though
not a tanar’ri itself, serves under and alongside those creatures. All five of these demons speak Abyssal, Celestial,
and Draconic.
COMBAT
Demons are ferocity personified. They are willing to
attack any creatures—even
other demons—just for
the sheer fun of it. Demons enjoy terrifying
their victims before
slaying them, and
they often devour
the slain. Many demons can create darkness, so they frequently blanket their
enemies with it before joining battle.
All demons have
the following abilities in common.
Outsider Traits:
A demon has darkvision (60-foot range).
It cannot be raised or
resurrected.
In addition, all tanar’ri have
the following abilities in common.
Tanar’ri Traits: Tanar’ri can communicate telepathically
with any creature within 100 feet that has a language.
Except as noted in the specific descriptions, a tanar’ri is
immune to electricity and poison, and it has acid resistance 20, cold resistance 20, and fire resistance 20.
Summon Tanar ’ri (Sp): All tanar’ri can summon other
tanar’ri to their aid. This ability functions like a summon
monster spell of the appropriate level, except that it has only
a limited chance of success. Roll d% and compare the result
with the creature’s chance of success. On a failure, no tanar’ri
answer the summons. Summoned tanar’ri automatically
return whence they came after 1 hour. A tanar’ri that has
just been summoned cannot use its own summon ability
for 1 hour. Most tanar’ri do not use their summon ability
lightly, since it leaves them beholden to the summoned
creatures. In general, they use it only when necessary to
save their own lives.
ABYSSAL MAW
An abyssal maw is a disgusting creature consisting mainly
of teeth. Its appetite is legendary; one maw has been
known to consume the better part of a centaur in less than
a minute.
An abyssal maw looks like a huge, toothy mouth perched
on a few stubby appendages. Its hide is a dull brown shade.
Combat
Abyssal maws serve as shock troops in evil armies. Since
they lack ranged attacks, they usually rush into melee
combat as soon as possible, where
their gnashing teeth do
the rest.
DEMONRend Fallen (Ex): An abyssal maw loves to tear into its
downed foes. It automatically deals an additional 2d8+4
points of damage to any foe it drops with a melee attack.
ABYSSAL SKULKER
This demon is small but mean. Gangs of abyssal skulkers
usually stalk ahead of evil armies and raiding parties to seek
out and eliminate enemy scouts and pickets.
An abyssal skulker resembles a hairless ape with large
hands and feet. Knobs of horn run along the crown of its
head and down its spine. Although capable of walking
upright, it habitually creeps about on all fours, keeping its
body close to the ground.
Combat
Abyssal skulkers love to sneak up on their prey, then charge
as a group. Their victims rarely have time to sound an alarm.
ABYSSAL RAVAGER
The abyssal ravager is a grotesque hybrid—part demon,
part hyena, and all nasty. Although its exact origins are
unclear, scholars agree that it is likely the result of demonic
lust, which has no bounds and results in all manner of
bizarre crossbreeds.
An abyssal ravager has baleful eyes and elongated jaws
full of overlarge teeth. Patches of scaly hide show
through its coarse, shaggy fur, and a row of curving spines
juts from its backbone. Its long, warty tail is equipped
with a vicious stinger. A full-grown specimen of either
gender stands about 5 feet tall at the shoulder, measures
nearly 10 feet from snout to base of tail, and weighs almost
2,000 pounds.
Combat
These demons are notoriously bad-tempered and aggressive.
They tend to attack anything they see or smell, striking it
repeatedly with their stingers.
Despite their formidable-looking teeth, abyssal ravagers
do not use bite attacks. Their weak jaws are useful only for
tearing apart prey that has already succumbed to their poisonous stings.
Poison (Ex): An abyssal ravager delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 14) with each successful sting attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (2d6 points of
Strength damage).
Scent (Ex): An abyssal ravager can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
57
DEMON
Abyssal Maw Abyssal Skulker Abyssal Ravager
Medium-Size Outsider Small Outsider Large Outsider
(Chaotic, Evil) (Chaotic, Evil) (Chaotic, Evil)
Hit Dice: 2d8+2 (11 hp) 2d8+2 (11 hp) 3d8+9 (22 hp)
Initiative: +0 +2 +4
Speed: 30 ft. 40 ft. 50 ft.
AC: 15 (+5 natural), touch 10, 15 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +2 natural), 17 (–1 size, +4 Dex, +4 natural),
flat-footed 15 touch 13, flat-footed 13 touch 13, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Bite +5 melee 2 claws +5 melee Sting +6 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+4 Claw 1d2 Sting 1d4+4 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Rend fallen — Poison
Special Qualities: Outsider traits Outsider traits Acid resistance 20, cold
resistance 20, immunity to
poison, outsider traits, scent
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +3, Will +2 Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +5 Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +4
Abilities: Str 17, Dex 10, Con 13, Str 10, Dex 15, Con 12, Str 17, Dex 19, Con 17,
Int 6, Wis 9, Cha 8 Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 9 Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +7, Jump +7, Listen +5, Hide +9, Listen +7, Move Jump +7, Listen +6, Move
Spot +1 Silently +7, Spot +7 Silently +6, Sense Motive +4,
Spot +4, Wilderness Lore +2
Feats: Alertness Weapon Finesse (claw) Weapon Focus (sting)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 2 2 5
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 3–4 HD (Medium-size); 3–4 HD (Small); 4–6 HD (Large);
5–6 HD (Large) 5–6 HD (Medium-size) 7–9 HD (Huge)58
JOVOC
These vicious little black-hearted fiends were born to
create strife. Their ability to inflict the damage they take
on others makes them invaluable in the front lines of
tanar’ri armies. A unit of jovocs can absorb repeated blows
and spells from the enemy and still survive to exact a punishing revenge.
A jovoc is a 4-foot-tall, bloated, hairless creature of
humanoid shape. It resembles the bruised and battered
corpse of a gnome left too long to decay in the heat of
summer, and the stench that emanates from its rough skin
lends credence to this impression. Its skin is dark blue or
black, and its eyes are vacant, black pools. Each of the creature’s long arms ends in a three-fingered hand with long
red fingernails, forever stained the color of blood.
Combat
Jovocs are not especially intelligent, but they are quick and
experienced ambushers who know how to use their small
size to best effect. Years of training and experience have
taught them how to take advantage of their aura of retribution and fast healing abilities. They often adopt a hit-and-run
strategy, jumping into a group of enemies to do as much
damage as possible, then dashing off for a few rounds to heal.
Alternatively, jovocs fighting in pairs or trios can utilize
their favorite tactic. Lurking just beyond the reach of their
enemies (preferably concealed by darkness, a wall, or some
other barrier), they begin to attack one another, automatically hitting with each swing. These attacks deal full damage
not only on the jovocs, but also on anyone caught within
their aura of retribution. After allowing a round or two for
DEMON
Jovoc (Tanar’ri) Palrethee (Tanar’ri) Zovvut
Small Outsider Medium-Size Outsider Medium-Size Outsider
(Chaotic, Evil) (Chaotic, Evil, Fire) (Chaotic, Evil)
Hit Dice: 4d8+18 (36 hp) 8d8+24 (60 hp) 10d8+20 (65 hp)
Initiative: +2 +3 +1
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (average)
AC: 16 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +3 natural), 23 (+3 Dex, +10 natural), 20 (+1 Dex, +9 natural),
touch 13, flat-footed 14 touch 13, flat-footed 20 touch 11, flat-footed 19
Attacks: 2 claws +6 melee and bite +1 flaming longsword +14/+9, 2 claws +13 melee
+1 melee or 2 slams +12 melee
Damage: Claw 1d3+1, bite 1d4 +1 flaming longsword 1d8+7/19–20 Claw 1d12+3
plus 1d6 fire, slam 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — Demonic burn, spell-like abilities Draining gaze, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: Aura of retribution, DR DR 20/+2, fiery shield, fire subtype, Create spawn, DR 20/+2,
5/silver, fast healing 5, outsider outsider traits, SR 18, summon outsider traits, SR 20
traits, SR 13, summon tanar’ri, tanar’ri, tanar’ri traits
tanar’ri traits
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +4 Fort +9, Ref +9, Will +7 Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +10
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 15, Con 16, Str 19, Dex 16, Con 16, Str 17, Dex 13, Con 15,
Int 7, Wis 10, Cha 7 Int 13, Wis 12, Cha 11 Int 14, Wis 16, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +8, Listen +7, Bluff +10, Diplomacy +10, Hide +9, Bluff +10, Concentration
Search +3, Sense Motive +3, Intimidate +2, Knowledge (any one) +12, Diplomacy +6, Hide +11,
Spot +7 +12, Listen +6, Sense Motive +12, Intimidate +4, Listen +13,
Search +12, Spellcraft +6, Spot +8 Move Silently +11, Scry +11,
+15, Sense Motive +16,
Spellcraft +8, Spot +18
Feats: Toughness (×2) Dodge, Expertise, Weapon Focus Alertness, Dodge, Mobility
(longsword)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–4) Solitary Solitary or squad (1 plus 2–4
wights)
Challenge Rating: 5 8 9
Treasure: Standard None Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Small); 9–12 HD (Medium-size) 11–16 HD (Medium-size)
9–12 HD (Medium-size)their fast healing ability to close their wounds, the creatures
begin to claw and bite one another again.
Aura of Retribution (Su): This effect is always active in
a 30-foot spread centered on the jovoc. Whenever the creature takes damage from any source, every nontanar’ri
within the area immediately takes an equal amount of
damage. A successful Fortitude saving throw (DC 15) halves
the damage. (For example, if an opponent deals 12 points of
damage to a jovoc, that opponent and every other nontanar’ri within 30 feet also immediately take 12 points of
damage each, or 6 points with a successful Fortitude save.)
Regardless of the source of the damage to the jovoc, the
damage dealt to nontanar’ri by this effect is not subject to
negation or reduction because of resistance, immunity,
damage reduction, spell resistance, or the like.
Fast Healing (Ex): A jovoc regains lost hit points at the
rate of 5 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit points
lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not
allow the jovoc to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Summon Tanar’ri (Sp): Once per day, a jovoc can attempt to
summon another jovoc with a 25% chance of success.
PALRETHEE
According to legend, palrethees were once ambitious
demons who yearned to rule the Abyss as balors. Despite
their great malice and their sadism, these lost souls failed in
some unknown trial by fire, and now they burn for all eternity. Many balors use palrethees as sergeants or messengers,
taking great pleasure in reinforcing the ambitious demons’
subservient positions. This connection between the two
kinds of tanar’ri has lent credence to the bards’ tales about
the palrethees’ origin.
A palrethee is a tall, emaciated creature of humanoid shape
with blood-red or blue skin and bony, white, vestigial wings.
The entire length of its body is sheathed in fire. The creature
can alter the color and appearance of its flames at will, making
them appear translucent and ghostly, or the red-orange shade
of a fiery forge, or even blue-white and delicate. No matter
how the flames look, their effects remain unchanged.
Combat
Palrethees have all the necessary combat abilities to enjoy
the din of battle, but these arrogant fiends often believe
themselves to be above the petty assignments they receive.
Desperate to acquire magic, mortal souls, or some other currency with which they can gain power, they try to make
bargains, use humans as tools, or trick unwary mortals into
doing their bidding.
When forced into combat, a palrethee usually employs its fear
spell-like ability first to scatter as
many opponents as possible,
then wades into melee with its
flaming longsword.
Demonic Burn (Ex): Any
creature hit by a palrethee’s
slam attack must succeed
at a Reflex save (DC 17)
or catch fire. The flame
burns for 1d4 rounds
(see Catching on Fire in
Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON
MASTER’s Guide). A burning creature can take
a move-equivalent
action to put out
the flame.
Spell-Like
Abilities: At
will—detect good,
detect magic, see invisibility; 1/day—
fear (30-foot radius).
Caster level 8th; save DC 10
+ spell level.
Fiery Shield (Sp): A palrethee is wreathed in scorching flames that cause damage
to each creature that attacks it
59
DEMON60
with a natural or hand-held melee weapon. Such an attack
deals normal damage to the palrethee (assuming its damage
reduction is overcome), but at the same time the attacker
takes 1d6+8 points of fire damage (spell resistance applies;
caster level 8th). Weapons with exceptional reach, such as
longspears, do not endanger their users in this way.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A palrethee is immune to fire damage
but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for
half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half
damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Summon Tanar’ri (Sp): Once per day, a palrethee can attempt
to summon another palrethee with a 30% chance of success.
Tanar’ri Traits: Unlike most tanar’ri, palrethees have no
resistance to cold attacks.
ZOVVUT
Zovvuts are the spawn of some terrible demon prince.
The first of them were created during horrible blood rites
centuries ago. Rumors link zovvuts to that master of
demons and necromancy known as Orcus, though the
secret of the creatures’ creation has become widely known
among the lords of the Abyss. Now zovvuts can be found in
many regions of the Abyss as well as on the Material Plane,
doing the bidding of anyone powerful enough to intimidate them into obedience.
Zovvuts are often used by demonic agents in conjunction
with more combative demons—the latter keep enemies at
bay while the zovvuts’ gaze attacks annihilate them. Zovvuts
resent any creature with the power to command them and,
like any demons, they constantly seek to undermine and
betray authority.
A zovvut is a muscular, pale-skinned, hairless creature of
humanoid shape. Its arms end in sharp, barbed claws that
are well designed for rending flesh. Foul, feathered wings
stretch upward from the zovvut’s shoulders. A third eye is
set into the center of its forehead.
Combat
Zovvuts are not afraid of combat. Though weaker than many
other demons in terms of combat ability, they rely on their
gaze attack to bring their foes to submission.
Draining Gaze (Su): Any living creature within 30 feet
of a zovvut that meets its glowing red eyes must succeed at a
Will saving throw (DC 17) or gain one negative level. For
DEMON
Jarilith (Tanar’ri) Kelvezu (Tanar’ri)
Large Outsider (Chaotic, Evil) Medium-Size Outsider (Chaotic, Evil)
Hit Dice: 10d8+80 (125 hp) 12d8+36 (90 hp)
Initiative: +9 +14
Speed: 60 ft. 30 ft., fly 60 ft. (good)
AC: 32 (–1 size, +9 Dex, +14 natural), 35 (+10 Dex, +15 natural),
touch 18, flat-footed 23 touch 20, flat-footed 35
Attacks: 2 claws +22 melee and bite +19 melee +1 scimitar of greater wounding +16/+11/+6 melee
and +1 dagger of wounding +16/+11 melee
Damage: Claw 2d6+12/18–20/×3, +1 scimitar of greater wounding 1d6+6/18–20 plus poison,
bite 2d8+6/18–20/×3 +1 dagger of wounding 1d4+3/19–20 plus poison
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Frightful presence, improved grab, pounce, Poison, sneak attack +8d6, spell-like abilities
rake 2d6+6/18–20, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Augmented critical, DR 30/+3, outsider traits, DR 20/+2, enhanced detection, evasion, outsider traits,
scent, SR 25, summon tanar’ri, tanar’ri traits SR 26, summon tanar’ri, tanar’ri traits, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +15, Ref +16, Will +8 Fort +11, Ref +18, Will +11
Abilities: Str 35, Dex 29, Con 27, Int 8, Wis 12, Cha 14 Str 21, Dex 31, Con 16, Int 17, Wis 16, Cha 16
Skills: Balance +14, Climb +14, Concentration +21, Bluff +15, Concentration +15, Diplomacy +7, Hide
Hide +22*, Jump +14, Listen +12, Move +33, Intimidate +5, Knowledge (any one) +13, Listen
Silently +25, Search +4, Spot +12 +18, Move Silently +33, Search +18, Sense
Motive +16, Spellcraft +13, Spot +18
Feats: Multiattack, Power Attack, Ambidexterity, Improved Initiative, Improved TwoWeapon Focus (claw) Weapon Fighting, Two-Weapon Fighting
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or pride (6–10) Solitary
Challenge Rating: 13 18
Treasure: Standard Standard coins; standard items, plus +1 scimitar
of greater wounding and +1 dagger of wounding
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 11–23 HD (Large); 24–30 HD (Huge) 13–24 HD (Medium-size)each negative level bestowed, the zovvut heals 5
points of damage. If the amount of healing is more
than the damage the creature has taken, it gains
any excess as temporary hit points. If the negative level has not been removed (with a spell
such as restoration) before 24 hours have
passed, the afflicted opponent must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 17) to remove
it. Failure means the opponent’s level (or
HD) is reduced by one.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—clairaudience/clairvoyance, darkness, desecrate,
detect good, detect thoughts, doom, suggestion, teleport without error (self
plus 50 pounds of objects only).
Caster level 12th; save DC 12 +
spell level.
Create Spawn (Su): Any
humanoid slain by the zovvut’s gaze attack (negative
levels equal to current Hit Dice,
or drained below 1st level)
becomes a wight in 1d4
rounds. This creature is
under the command
of the zovvut that killed
it, and it remains enslaved
until either it or the zovvut dies. A
spawn does not possess any of the abilities it had in life.
JARILITH
Jariliths, the elite hunting beasts of the Abyss, are terrifying
feline creatures conjured up from the nightmares of a thousand generations of mortals. They prefer demonic flesh and
are comfortable hunting their favorite prey in desert, jungle,
waste, or forest. Jariliths are notoriously difficult to control,
so even the most powerful balor must tread carefully around
them. They sense weakness, and to them nearly any other
creature seems weak.
A jarilith resembles a slightly larger than average male lion,
complete with a glorious mane. Long teeth extend from its
jaws, and its claws are longer still. The creature’s blood-red
coat reveals its origin, but it strikes so fast that the only clue
most victims get to its presence is a slight reek of brimstone.
Jariliths do not speak, but they understand Abyssal. They
communicate silently with one another through telepathy.
Combat
A jarilith is a direct, uncompromising foe in battle. Normally, it relies on its Power Attack feat and its augmented
critical ability to deal horrendous amounts of damage to its
foes. Though they often do not need the advantage, jariliths
prefer to ambush their opponents.
Frightful Presence (Ex): When a jarilith charges or
attacks, it inspires terror in all creatures within 30 feet that
have fewer Hit Dice or levels than it has. Each potentially
affected opponent must succeed at a Will save (DC 17) or
become shaken—a condition that lasts until the opponent is out of range. A successful save leaves that
opponent immune to that jarilith’s frightful presence for 24 hours.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a jarilith hits an
opponent that is at least one size category
smaller than itself with a bite attack, it deals
normal damage and attempts to start a grapple
as a free action without provoking an attack
of opportunity (grapple bonus +26). If
it gets a hold, it can attempt to
rake in the same round. Thereafter, the jarilith has the option to conduct the grapple
normally, or simply use its
jaws to hold the opponent
(–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the jarilith is
not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful
grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals bite damage and
allows another rake attempt.
Pounce (Ex): If a jarilith charges,
it can make a full attack (including a rake
attempt, see below) even though it has moved.
Rake (Ex): On any round that a jarilith has a hold on an
opponent (see Improved Grab, above), it can make two rake
attacks (+21 melee) with its hind legs for 2d6+6 points of
damage each. The jarilith can also attempt to rake when it
pounces on an opponent.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—clairaudience/clairvoyance,
darkness, detect good, detect thoughts, doom. Caster level 12th;
save DC 12 + spell level.
Augmented Critical (Ex): A jarilith threatens a critical
hit on a natural attack roll of 18–20. On a successful critical
hit with a bite, claw, or rake attack, it deals triple damage.
Scent (Ex): A jarilith can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Summon Tanar ’ri (Sp): Once per day, a jarilith can
attempt to summon another jarilith with a 35% chance of
success.
Skills: A jarilith receives a +4 racial bonus on Balance,
Hide, and Move Silently checks. *In areas of tall grass or
heavy undergrowth, its Hide bonus improves to +12.
KELVEZU
Mariliths act as generals in tanar’ri armies, and balors are the
mighty aristocrats of the Abyssal hierarchy. Both find
the services of kelvezus—the infiltrators and assassins of the
demonic realm—quite useful. Kelvezus rarely lead troops;
instead, they surgically remove specific opponents (such as
61
DEMON62
devils, competing demons, or obstinate mortals) in accordance with the orders of more powerful demons.
The kelvezu is remarkable among the higher ranks of
demonkind because of its size—it stands barely 5 feet tall.
Because of its size and its humanoid shape, it can be mistaken for a human if it uses a touch of disguise to hide its
rosy red skin.
Combat
Kelvezus strike from stealth, relying not only on their invisibility, but also on their gift for hiding and sneaking. Like their
mortal counterparts, these assassins try to dispatch their targets quickly. If they cannot, they retreat and strike again when
conditions are favorable. Every kelvezu carries a +1 scimitar of
greater wounding (see below) that resembles a serpent’s tail and
a +1 dagger of wounding that resembles a serpent’s tooth.
Poison (Ex): A kelvezu continually coats its weapons
with an injury poison (Fortitude save DC 19) produced from
its fingertips. The initial and secondary damage is the same
(1d6 points of Constitution damage). Kelvezu poison is
highly perishable, becoming inert 1 minute after the creature stops applying it.
Sneak Attack (Ex): Any time the kelvezu’s target is
denied a Dexterity bonus, or when it is flanked by the
kelvezu, the latter deals an additional +8d6 points of damage
on a successful melee attack.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—deeper darkness, desecrate,
detect good, detect law, greater dispelling, improved invisibility
(self only), read magic, suggestion, teleport without error (self
plus 50 pounds of objects only), tongues (self only), unhallow.
Caster level 18th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Enhanced Detection (Su): In addition to its regular
senses, a kelvezu perceives foes through detect magic and see
invisibility effects (caster level 18th) that are always active.
Evasion (Ex): If exposed to any effect that normally
allows a Reflex save for half damage, a kelvezu takes no
damage on a successful saving throw.
Summon Tanar’ri (Sp): Once per day, a kelvezu can attempt
to summon another kelvezu with a 25% chance of success.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): A kelvezu retains its Dexterity
bonus to AC even when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked.
Skills: A kelvezu receives a +8 racial bonus on Hide and
Move Silently checks.
New Melee Weapon Special Ability
Greater Wounding: A wound inflicted by a weapon of
greater wounding bleeds for 2 points of damage per round
thereafter, in addition to the normal damage the weapon
deals. Multiple wounds from the weapon result in cumulative
bleeding loss (two wounds deal 4 points of damage per round,
and so on). The bleeding can be stopped only by a successful
Heal check (DC 15) or the application of a cure spell or some
other healing spell (heal, healing circle, and so on).
Caster Level: 15th; Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and
Armor, Mordenkainen’s sword; Market Price: +4 bonus.
DESMODU
Large Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 12d8+48 (102 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft. (40 ft. when galloping), climb 30 ft.
AC: 20 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +5 natural, +3 masterwork studded
leather), touch 12, flat-footed 17
Attacks: 2 claws +16 melee and bite +14 melee, or masterwork notbora +15/+10/+5 melee and masterwork notbora +15 melee and bite +14 melee, or Large heavy lance
+16/+11/+6 melee, or masterwork mighty composite
longbow (+4 Str bonus) with masterwork arrows
+16/+11/+6 ranged
Damage: Claw 1d4+5, bite 1d6+2, or notbora 2d6+5/19–20
(primary), notbora 2d6+2 (off hand), Large heavy lance
2d6+7/×3, masterwork mighty composite longbow (+4
Str bonus) with masterwork arrows 1d8+4/×3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Screech, sonic abilities, wounding
Special Qualities: Blindsight 120 ft., darkvision 60 ft.,
gallop, scent, speak with bats, +4 racial bonus on saves
against sonic effects
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +11, Will +10
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 16, Con 18, Int 15, Wis 15, Cha 11
Skills: Animal Empathy +5, Balance +12, Climb +13,
Handle Animal +5, Jump +14, Listen +11, Move Silently
+8, Ride (bat) +10, Spot +11, Tumble +10, Use Rope +8
Feats: Ambidexterity (B), Combat Reflexes, Expertise,
Great Fortitude, Multiattack, Quick Draw, Two-Weapon
Fighting (B)
Climate/Terrain: Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, company (4–7), troop (8–18
plus 1 leader of 2nd–5th level), colony (20–80 plus 5 3rdlevel elders and 1 leader of 4th–6th level), or enclave
(100–600 plus 10 3rd-level elders, 5 5th-level senior
elders, and 1 leader of 5th–9th level)
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: No coins, 1/2 goods, standard items, plus
equipment
Alignment: Usually neutral good
Advancement: By character class
Desmodus are massive, batlike humanoids who live in caverns deep underground. They are omnivorous and usually
not dangerous unless attacked. Until recently, most sages
thought them to be extinct, wiped out in an ancient war
against the drow.
An adult desmodu stands 8 to 9 feet tall. Its body is covered with reddish-black or reddish-brown fur. The creature has long arms, short legs, and a head like that of a bat.
A membrane of leathery, black skin stretches from each
wrist to the corresponding ankle. A desmodu’s hands and
feet are long and narrow, with stubby, curving digits
ending in retractable claws. The fingers and toes, along
DESMODUwith the heel and palms, are equipped with cilia that give
the creature a very sure grip.
A desmodu is bipedal. Normally it walks upright with a
rolling gait, but it can also can get down on all fours and
gallop along at twice its base speed. The typical desmodu
wears armor and a harness for carrying tools and weapons,
but very little else.
Desmodus speak Undercommon and Terran in addition
to a language of their own. This language, called Desmodu,
includes both ultrasonic and subsonic utterances, so nondesmodus cannot speak it. Desmodus have deep, rich voices,
though their speech includes the occasional sharp squeak
or bass rumble when they are using a language
other than their native tongue.
COMBAT
Desmodus use their sonic abilities to
give themselves bonuses and their
foes penalties. Their favorite melee
weapon is the notbora, an exotic
double weapon of their
own invention.
These creatures often rush into melee
on all fours, using
smokesticks to blind
foes. They follow up
by using the Quick
Draw feat to draw
their notboras
and attack as they
stand up. Desmodus also are fond
of dropping down
on opponents from
the ceiling of a cavern,
and they make full use
of their superior reach
in melee. Once battle is
joined, they jump and tumble
to bypass the foes’ front line and attack opposing spellcasters or set up flanking attacks.
Screech (Su): Once per day, a desmodu can produce a
screech that can literally tear items apart. The creature can
choose one of two effects.
Ray: A ray deals 5d6 points of sonic damage to any creature or object it strikes. This attack has a range of 30 feet.
Spread: A sonic concussion causes every creature (except
other desmodus) within a 30-foot spread centered on the
desmodu to be stunned for 1d4 rounds. A successful Fortitude save (DC 20) negates the effect.
Sonic Abilities (Su): At will, a desmodu can emit subsonic vibrations, choosing one of two effects. It takes a
standard action to invoke an effect or to concentrate to
maintain it.
Despair: Each foe in a 30-foot spread centered on the
desmodu takes a –2 morale penalty on saving throws, attack
rolls, ability checks, skill checks, and weapon damage rolls
for as long as the desmodu concentrates and for 1d4 rounds
thereafter. A successful Will save (DC 16) negates this
sonic, mind-affecting effect.
Hope: Every ally in a 30-foot spread centered on the
desmodu gains a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, attack
rolls, ability checks, skill checks, and weapon damage rolls
for as long as the desmodu concentrates and for 1d4
rounds thereafter.
Wounding (Ex): A desmodu’s saliva contains an anticoagulant that causes bite wounds
the creature inflicts to bleed freely. A wound
resulting from a desmodu’s bite attack bleeds for
an additional 1 point of damage per round
thereafter. Multiple wounds from such
attacks result in cumulative bleeding loss (two wounds for 2 points
of damage per round, and so on).
The bleeding stops on its own
after 1 minute. Alternatively, it can be stopped
by a successful Heal
check (DC 15) or the
application of a cure spell
or some other healing
spell (heal, healing circle,
or the like).
Blindsight (Ex): A
desmodu emits high-frequency sounds, inaudible
to most other creatures,
that bounce off nearby
objects and creatures. This
ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 120 feet. The
desmodu usually does not need
to make Spot or Listen checks to
notice creatures within range of its blindsight. A
silence spell negates this ability and forces the desmodu to
rely on its vision (which is as good as a human’s).
Gallop (Ex): A desmodu can get down on all fours and
gallop along like an ape at a speed of 40 feet, provided that
its hands are free.
Speak with Bats (Sp): This ability functions like a speak with
animals spell (caster level 1st), except that it only works on
bats and is usable at will.
Skills: A desmodu receives a +4 racial bonus on Spot and
Listen checks, which is lost if its blindsight is negated. The
creature also gets a +2 racial bonus on grapple checks. When
wearing light armor or no armor, the creature gains a +2
bonus on Balance and Jump checks. All these racial bonuses
are included in the statistics above. When a desmodu has its
63
DESMODU64
hands free and deliberately jumps down from a height, subtract 10 feet from the distance fallen to determine damage.
If it makes a successful Jump check (DC 15), reduce the
effective distance fallen by another 10 feet.
DESMODU SOCIETY
Desmodus live in small, independent family groups that
gather in loosely organized colonies or enclaves to pool
resources and create a communal defense. They eschew
complex social organizations, and individual families live
as they please. Each family group includes several generations, with the eldest generation acting as the ruling body
to settle all issues.
The oldest and most experienced desmodus in an
enclave form a council to settle disputes between families
and make recommendations about handling external
affairs. Desmodus of the same age from different families
frequently adopt each other as siblings. These adopted siblings are called age-mates, and they always refer to each
other as though they were blood kin. The extended family
ties that desmodus form in this manner can be both varied
and complex, and they are usually not clear to anyone
except other desmodus.
Desmodus live in large caverns festooned with stalactites
and stalagmites. They tunnel into the ceilings to create
living spaces, keeping the entrances concealed among the
stalactites. They use the cavern floor to grow fungi, herd
lizards, and conduct any other activities that might be difficult to perform on the ceiling. Desmodus breed a variety of
bats to serve as steeds and guardians.
A desmodu settlement includes noncombatants
(mostly children) equal to 20% of the fighting
population. The society is egalitarian, so
both males and females can be found
filling almost every role.
Desmodus enjoy a simple lifestyle. They understand the value of
weapons and tools, but they keep
neither money nor valuables.
They conduct trade through
barter, and the only distinction
they recognize as a status symbol
is the number of bats and lizards
a family owns.
Breeding, keeping, and training bats is a favorite activity
among the desmodus. They consider it a mark of distinction
to breed a new and useful
type of bat, and thus countless varieties of bats exist
within desmodu caverns. Three of the
types that are of value in combat are
detailed in the Desmodu Bats entry (see
below), but there are many others as well.
Desmodu artisans produce a wide variety of ingenious
and high-quality goods. Some of these devices that may be
of interest to adventurers are described in the Desmodu
Items section, below. These creatures also produce all
manner of mundane items, including toys, household
goods, and musical instruments. All desmodus appreciate
good music and items that can produce or enhance sound.
Their own music, however, is mostly inaudible to others
because of its ultrasonic and subsonic components.
The chief desmodu deity is Vesperian, who is the creator
and protector of the race. Typically there is a shrine dedicated to him in every enclave, and many dwellings also
boast private altars to Vesperian.
DESMODU ITEMS
Desmodus have created a number of specialized items for
their own use. Some of these items are detailed below.
Breathing Mask: This mask covers the user’s face. It is
fitted with goggles and a bag of an alchemical substance that
allows the wearer to breathe for up to 4 hours. With the
mask on, the wearer can ignore the effects of noxious fumes
and inhaled toxins. The mask even enables the wearer to survive underwater or in an airless environment.
The item consists of a masterwork leather mask with goggles (cost 50 gp), and the alchemical air supply, which costs
950 gp and can be manufactured with a successful Alchemy
check (DC 20). A partially used air supply cannot be combined with another partially used one to get a fresh supply,
but it can be discarded and replaced with a new supply.
Cost: 1,000 gp; Weight: 5 lb.
Cable: This 100-foot-long metal
cord is thinner, stronger, and lighter
than even silk rope. It is too thin for
most creatures to climb it easily (Climb
DC 20), but desmodus using a cable
can climb at their normal climb speed.
The cable has a snap ring at each end
so that it can be quickly attached to or
detached from a piton, spike, grappling
hook, or other item without a Use
Rope check.
The cable has 10 hit points and hardness 5. It can be burst with a successful
Strength check (DC 32). Its stiffness
imposes a –2 circumstance penalty on
Use Rope checks.
Cost: 50 gp; Weight: 4 lb.
Cablespool: This gadget carries 100
feet of cable in an enclosed reel. The
reel is spring-wound and can pull in all
100 feet of cable in 1 round (pulling
with an effective Strength score of 16). It
can be set to reel or unreel the cable automatically as the user climbs, or to act as a brake, allowing the
user to jump down 100 feet without harm.
DESMODUCost: 125 gp (175 with cable); Weight: 2 lb. (6 lb. with cable).
Harness: Desmodus cannot wear belts because of the
flaps of skin attached to their flanks. Instead, they wear
harnesses that loop over their shoulders and between their
legs. Straps crisscross the front and back of the desmodu’s
body to keep the harness from slipping off.
Each desmodu harness is fitted with rings, hooks, and ties
for carrying weapons and equipment. A reinforced hook
hangs near the waist for carrying a cablespool.
Cost: 20 gp; Weight: 2 lb.
Frostfire: This sticky, adhesive substance drains away
heat when exposed to air or moisture. A flask of frostfire
can be thrown as a grenadelike weapon with a range increment of 10 feet, and a direct hit deals 1d6 points of cold
damage. The target can then attempt to scrape off or wash
away the frostfire, if desired. If this does not occur, the
target takes an additional 1d6 points of cold damage on
the round following the direct hit. Removing frostfire by
scraping requires a successful Reflex saving throw (DC
15). Alternatively, the substance can be removed automatically by dousing it with at least 1 pint of an alcoholic or acidic solution (such as wine or vinegar).
Either method requires a full-round action.
Cost: 40 gp; Weight: 1 lb.
Kinship Badge: This item resembles an exquisite cymbal or flattened bell, measuring 3 or 4
inches across. When struck, it emits a single
musical note. It also resonates and produces a
distinctive ultrasonic tone when a desmodu’s
echolocation sounds strike it. Desmodus usually
exchange kinship badges with their age-mates and
use them to identify each other in battle.
Cost: 5 gp; Weight: —.
Notbora: This Huge exotic double weapon looks like a
big quarterstaff with a crook at one end. A notbora has a
hinge in the middle so that it can be folded for storage. The
wielder can unfold the weapon and lock the hinge by
pressing a hidden catch (a free action when drawing the
notbora). The notbora’s straight end is actually a sheath
that can be removed to reveal a blade. The hooked end can
be used to make trip attacks. A wielder who is tripped
during his or her own trip attempt can drop the notbora to
avoid being tripped.
Each end of the notbora deals 2d6 points of damage. The
hooked end is a blunt weapon that deals double damage on
a critical hit and threatens a critical hit on an attack roll of
20. With the sheath in place, the straight end functions the
same way. With the sheath removed, the straight end is a
slashing weapon that deals double damage on a critical hit
and threatens a critical hit on an attack roll of 19 or 20.
Cost: 20 gp; Weight: 2 lb.
DESMODU CHARACTERS
Desmodus sometimes become barbarians or rogues, but
their favored class is fighter. A desmodu fighter usually
leads a colony’s council of elders, and fighters also lead most
warbands, in those rare cases when the desmodus join to
attack a common enemy. Wizards and clerics are unknown
in the race. Some desmodu sorcerers and bards exist, but
most desmodu spellcasters are adepts.
Because of its many special abilities, a desmodu PC’s
effective character level (ECL) is equal to its class level +
14. Thus, a 1st-level desmodu fighter has an ECL of 15 and
is the equivalent of a 15th-level character.
DESMODU BAT
The desmodus love bats. They breed and maintain bats
of all shapes and sizes as companions, guards, and
draft animals. Three unique kinds of desmodu-bred
bats are described here.
COMBAT
Like other bats, these creatures fight on the wing,
swooping down to bite their foes.
Blindsight (Ex): A bat emits high-frequency
sounds, inaudible to most other creatures,
that bounce off nearby objects and creatures. This ability enables it to discern
objects and creatures within 120 feet. The
bat usually does not need to make Spot or
Listen checks to notice creatures within
range of its blindsight. A silence spell
negates this ability and forces the bat to
rely on its weak vision, which has a range
of 10 feet.
Immunities: The bats the desmodus breed
are immune to the despair and stunning screech abilities
of desmodus.
HUNTING BAT
The desmodus breed these bats as hunting animals, in the
same way that humans breed hunting dogs. When hunting
for meat animals underground, a desmodu releases one or
more hunting bats. When the bat discovers prey, it calls
ultrasonically to its master, then begins chasing its quarry.
A hunting bat has a body like that of an ordinary bat and a
head that resembles a wolf ’s. Its fur is usually black or gray.
Combat
When a hunting bat swoops down on its prey, it first
attempts to trip its opponent. Whether or not this tactic succeeds, the bat follows up the attempt with bite attacks. The
bat then picks up any prey that it has downed in its jaws and
returns with it to its master.
Trip (Ex): A hunting bat that hits with a bite attack can
attempt to trip the opponent as a free action without
making a touch attack or provoking an attack of opportunity. If the attempt fails, the opponent cannot react to trip
the bat.
65
DESMODU
BAT
RGM66
Scent (Ex): A hunting bat can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: A hunting bat receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks. It also receives a +8 racial bonus on Spot and Listen
checks. *These latter two bonuses are lost if
its blindsight is negated.
GUARD BAT
A guard bat is nearly identical to a
dire bat, except that the former is
more agile, has even keener
senses, and has a particularly
dangerous bite. The desmodus
use these creatures primarily as sentries.
A guard bat looks like a very large
flying fox, except that it has long teeth,
like those of a vampire bat, and shaggy
fur on its head and body.
Combat
In battle, a group of guard bats typically picks out a single
target and swoops in to bite. Then each guard bat uses its
Spring Attack feat to bite and fly out of reach before the foe
can respond.
Wounding (Ex): A guard bat’s saliva contains an anticoagulant that causes bite wounds the creature inflicts to
bleed freely. A wound resulting from a guard bat’s bite attack
bleeds for an additional 1 point of damage per round thereafter. Multiple wounds from such attacks result in cumulative bleeding loss (two wounds for 2 points of damage per
round, and so on). The bleeding can be stopped only by a successful Heal check (DC 15) or the application of a cure spell
or some other healing spell (heal, healing circle, or the like).
Skills: A guard bat receives a +8 racial bonus on Spot
and Listen checks. *These bonuses are lost if blindsight is negated.
WAR BAT
The desmodus breed these
creatures as mounts and
beasts of burden. Desmodus armed with huge
heavy lances sometimes
ride them into battle.
A war bat has a wingspan of 16 to 18
feet. Except for its size, it looks like a normal bat.
Combat
War bats seldom fight on their own unless attacked first or
ordered into battle by their masters.
Skills: A war bat receives a +4 racial bonus on Spot and
Listen checks. *These bonuses are lost if blindsight is negated.
DESMODU
BAT
Hunting Bat Guard Bat War Bat
Medium-Size Animal Large Animal Huge Animal
Hit Dice: 4d8+4 (22 hp) 4d8+12 (30 hp) 10d8+50 (95 hp)
Initiative: +7 +6 +6
Speed: 20 ft., fly 60 ft. (good) 20 ft., fly 60 ft. (good) 20 ft., fly 40 ft. (good)
AC: 20 (+7 Dex, +3 natural), 20 (–1 size, +6 Dex, +5 natural), 23 (–2 size, +6 Dex, +9 natural),
touch 17, flat-footed 13 touch 15, flat-footed 14 touch 14, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Bite +10 Bite +5 melee Bite +12 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6+3 Bite 1d8+4 plus wounding Bite 2d6+10
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Trip Wounding —
Special Qualities: Blindsight 120 ft., immunities, Blindsight 120 ft., immunities Blindsight 120 ft., immunities
scent
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +11, Will +4 Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +6 Fort +12, Ref +13, Will +9
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 24, Con 13, Str 17, Dex 22, Con 17 Str 25, Dex 22, Con 21,
Int 2, Wis 16, Cha 7 Int 2, Wis 14, Cha 7 Int 2, Wis 14, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +16, Listen +14*, Listen +15*, Move Silently +11, Listen +11*, Move Silently +11,
Move Silently +19, Spot +14* Spot +15* Spot +11*
Feats: Weapon Finesse (bite) (B) Dodge (B), Mobility (B), Spring —
Attack (B)
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary or colony (5–8) Solitary or colony (5–8) Solitary or colony (5–8)
Challenge Rating: 3 3 5
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 5–12 HD (Large) 5–12 HD (Huge) 11–16 HD (Huge);
17–30 HD (Gargantuan)
RGMDevils are fiends from the plane of Baator, a lawful evil
realm. The most numerous devils are the baatezu, who are
infamous for their strength, evil temperament, and ruthlessly efficient organization. These creatures are constantly
in conflict with every force of good in the universe, as well
as with the chaotic evil demons and tanar’ri of the Abyss.
Baatezu have a rigid caste system, in which authority
derives not only from power but also from station. These
creatures occupy themselves with extending their influence
throughout the planes, primarily by corrupting mortals.
Baatezu who further this agenda are usually rewarded with
improved stations.
67
DEVIL
DEVIL
Advespa (Baatezu) Amnizu (Baatezu) Malebranche (Baatezu)
Large Outsider (Evil, Lawful) Medium-Size Outsider Huge Outsider (Evil, Lawful)
(Evil, Lawful)
Hit Dice: 4d8+12 (30 hp) 9d8+9 (49 hp) 16d8+96 (168 hp)
Initiative: +5 +4 –1
Speed: 30 ft., fly 40 ft. (good) 30 ft., fly 60 ft. (average) 40 ft., fly 120 ft. (average)
AC: 17 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), 21 (+11 natural), touch 10, 24 (–2 size, –1 Dex, +17
touch 10, flat-footed 16 flat-footed 21 natural), touch 7, flat footed 24
Attacks: 4 claws +8 melee and sting Touch +10 melee Huge masterwork trident
+3 melee +25/+20/+15/+10 melee and
gore +22 melee, or Huge
masterwork trident
+25/+20/+15/+10 melee and
bite +22 melee, or 2 claws +24
melee and gore +22 melee, or
2 claws +24 melee and bite
+22 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+5, sting 1d4+2 Touch 2d4 plus feeblemind Huge masterwork trident
plus poison 2d8+15, claw 2d4+10,
gore 2d6+5, bite 2d6+5
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, poison, Feeblemind touch, spell-like Charge, fear aura, improved
spell-like abilities abilities, summon baatezu grab
Special Qualities: Baatezu traits, DR 5/+1, Baatezu traits, outsider traits, Baatezu traits, DR 25/+2,
outsider traits, regeneration 2, regeneration 4, secure intelligence, outsider traits, regeneration 8,
SR 15 SR 18 SR 20
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +4 Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +8 Fort +16, Ref +9, Will +9
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 13, Con 17, Str 12, Dex 11, Con 13, Str 30, Dex 9, Con 23,
Int 8, Wis 11, Cha 10 Int 16, Wis 15, Cha 10 Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 10
Skills: Hide +4, Listen +5, Move Balance +2, Concentration +13, Balance +1, Bluff +12, Climb
Silently +5, Search +4, Spot +7 Diplomacy +2, Hide +12, Jump +3, +13, Diplomacy +2, Intimidate
Knowledge (the planes) +9, +13, Jump +25, Listen +17,
Scry +6, Search +15, Sense Move Silently +17, Search +18,
Motive +14, Spellcraft +15, Spot Spot +18, Tumble +17
+14, Swim +7, Tumble +12
Feats: Flyby Attack, Improved Combat Casting, Improved Cleave, Flyby Attack, Great
Initiative Initiative, Quicken Spell-Like Cleave, Multiattack, Power
Ability Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, team (3–4), squad Solitary, pair, team (3–4), or troupe Solitary, pair, team (3–4), or
(5–10), or swarm (11–20) (1–3 amnizus plus 2–4 advespas) squad (5–10)
Challenge Rating: 3 7 9
Treasure: None Standard Standard
Alignment: Always lawful evil Always lawful evil Always lawful evil
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Large); 10–18 HD (Medium-size); 17–32 HD (Huge);
9–12 HD (Huge) 19–27 HD (Large) 33–48 HD (Gargantuan)68
Most baatezu have a Gothic gargoyle look. They are
grotesque and unsightly by human standards, corrupted
physically by the evil they embrace. A few have an infernal
sort of beauty in their natural forms, but these are rare.
The advespa, amnizu, and malebranche are vicious
devils usually found in the service of more powerful
baatezu, or of evil mortals who treat with such beings.
These baatezu appear wherever their infernal masters send
them, though the amnizus in particular are rarely deployed
on other planes.
Unless otherwise noted, devils speak Infernal, Celestial,
and Draconic.
COMBAT
Devils enjoy bullying those weaker than themselves, and
they often attack good creatures just to gain a trophy or
three. Some devils are surrounded by fear auras, which they
use to break up powerful groups so that they can defeat
opponents piecemeal.
The baatezu tend to use their illusion abilities to delude
and confuse foes as much as possible in combat. One of their
favorite tricks is to create illusory reinforcements, so that
enemies can never be entirely sure whether a threat is only
a figment or a group of real devils that has been summoned
to join the fray.
All devils share the following traits.
Outsider Traits: A devil has darkvision (60-foot range). It
cannot be raised or resurrected.
In addition, all baatezu have the following abilities in
common unless otherwise stated.
Summon Baatezu (Sp): Most baatezu can summon other
baatezu to their aid. This ability functions like a summon
monster spell of the appropriate level, except that it has only
a limited chance of success. Roll d% and compare the result
with the creature’s listed chance of success. On a failure, no
baatezu answer the summons. Summoned creatures automatically return whence they came after 1 hour. A baatezu
that has just been summoned cannot use its own summon
ability for 1 hour. Most baatezu do not use their summon
ability lightly, since it leaves them beholden to the summoned creatures. In general, they use it only when necessary to gain victory or to save their own lives.
Baatezu Traits: Unless otherwise noted, a baatezu can
communicate telepathically with any creature within 100
feet that has a language. In addition, it can see perfectly in
darkness of any kind, even that created by a deeper darkness
spell. A baatezu is immune to fire and poison, and it has acid
resistance 20 and cold resistance 20.
ADVESPA
Advespas are female, wasplike devils that patrol the skies
above the infernal planes. They are often found under
the command of some more powerful baatezu.
An advespa appears as a huge, heavybodied wasp with a female face. It has small,
antennalike horns, protruding humanoid
features, dripping mandibles,
a chitinous hide, and a
pair of dark, resilient, insect
wings. Its lower abdomen terminates in a barbed, poisonous stinger,
which may be brought up over the creature’s
head in the manner of a scorpion’s tail.
The most common advespa is entirely black; in fact, it looks as if it
had been carved from obsidian or
some other dark stone. The more
powerful advespas (those with
higher stations and slightly
higher Charisma scores) have
striations of yellow, red, and
orange, and they tend to be smaller
than the common advespas. These
colorful advespas
usually serve
as the leaders of
squads and swarms.
Combat
An advespa usually attacks from above, seeking to
pounce upon and grapple an opponent. If it succeeds,
DEVILit stings with its poisonous tail until its foe succumbs, then
flies off with its helpless prey.
Improved Grab (Ex): If an advespa hits an opponent that
is at least one size category smaller than itself with both
claws, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple
as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +13). If it gets a hold, it automatically hits
with its sting. Thereafter, the advespa has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its claws to hold
the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the advespa
is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful
grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals damage from both claws and the sting.
Poison (Ex): The advespa injects a dose of poison (Fortitude save DC 15) with each successful sting attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1d4 points of
Strength damage).
Spell-Like Abilities: 3/day—change self, command, produce
flame, pyrotechnics. Caster level 4th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Regeneration (Ex): An advespa takes normal damage
from acid, and also from holy weapons and blessed weapons
of at least +1 enhancement.
Summon Baatezu (Sp): Once per day, an advespa can
attempt to summon 1d2 additional advespas with a 30%
chance of success.
AMNIZU
Amnizus are short, stocky, winged devils that serve as
guardians at the gates of the Nine Hells of Baator. The typical amnizu has one or more squads of advespas at its disposal
at all times.
An amnizu has an oversized, elongated head, small piglike eyes, a pug nose, and a large, fang-filled mouth. Its
wings are large and batlike.
Amnizus speak Infernal and Common.
Combat
An amnizu’s task is not so much to keep interlopers out of
the infernal domains as it is to ensure that, once they enter,
they never escape. To that end, the creature usually softens
up opponents with quickened fireballs and the attacks of its
advespa troops before attempting to use its feeblemind
touch to capture and detain its foes.
Feeblemind Touch (Su): The touch of an amnizu duplicates the effect of a feeblemind spell (caster level 14th; Will
save DC 14).
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—major image; 3/day—
fireball; 1/day—sequester. Caster level 14th; save DC 10 +
spell level.
Regeneration (Ex): An amnizu takes normal damage
from acid, and also from holy weapons and blessed weapons
of at least +1 enhancement.
Secure Intelligence (Ex): An amnizu is immune to
any effect that would drain, damage, or otherwise reduce
its Intelligence score.
Summon Baatezu (Sp): Once per day, an amnizu may
summon 1d3 advespas or 1 amnizu with a 50% chance of
success.
MALEBRANCHE
Malebranches are huge, hulking devils with wickedly
curving horns. These creatures usually serve other, more
intelligent members of the infernal hierarchy as warriors,
enforcers, punishers, and occasionally as mounts. Within
the Nine Hells of Baator, malebranches are usually armed
with immense masterwork tridents wrought from cold
iron. These aggressive baatezu tend to bully creatures
smaller than themselves and grovel before those that are
more powerful.
A malebranche is a massive, winged devil of humanoid
shape with an underslung jaw and huge, slightly curved
horns. Its feral eyes glow with flickering shades of red.
Malebranches speak only Infernal, but they underestand
Common—particularly orders and curses in that language.
Combat
Malebranches are heavy hitters—the brute force among the
baatezu—and they utilize their great strength to the best of
their ability. A malebranche usually charges into combat on
silent wings, hoping to catch its opponents flat-footed with
a gore attack. Then the creature wreaks havoc with its
masterwork iron trident.
Charge (Ex): A malebranche typically begins a battle
with a flying charge at an opponent on the ground. In
addition to the normal benefits and hazards of a charge,
this tactic allows the malebranche to make a single gore
attack (+24 melee) that deals 6d6+15 points of damage.
The creature can also charge while moving on the ground,
if it wishes.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a malebranche hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
claw attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +34). The creature has the
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
claw to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the malebranche is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals claw damage.
Fear Aura (Su): As a free action, a malebranche can produce a fear effect. This ability functions like a fear spell
(caster level 12th; save DC 18), except that it affects all creatures within a 15-foot radius around the malebranche. Any
creature that makes a successful saving throw against the
effect cannot be affected again by that malebranche’s fear
aura for 24 hours. All baatezu are immune to the malebranche’s fear aura.
Regeneration (Ex): A malebranche takes normal
damage from acid, and also from holy and blessed weapons
of at least +3 enhancement.
69
DEVIL70
DINOSAUR
Dinosaurs, or terrible lizards, are ancient reptilian beasts
that may be related to dragons. Among the traits that the
typical predatory dinosaur shares with many dragons are
sharp teeth, a savage disposition, a well-developed sense
of territory, and a ruthless drive to hunt. The herbivorous dinosaurs are not usually aggressive unless wounded
or defending their young, but they may attack if startled
or harassed.
Dinosaurs most often live in rugged or isolated areas that
humanoids seldom visit: remote mountain valleys, inaccessible plateaus, tropical islands, and the densest jungles. They
may also populate a campaign’s “lost lands.”
COMBAT
Dinosaurs take full advantage of their size and speed. The
swift carnivores stalk prey, staying hidden in cover until
they can get close enough to charge. The great herbivores
frequently overrun and trample their opponents.
Scent (Ex): A dinosaur can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
CRYPTOCLIDUS
Cryptoclidus is a plesiosaur, a 10-foot-long aquatic reptile
much like elasmosaurus (see the Monster Manual). Its neck
isn’t as long, proportionately, as that of elasmosaurus, but
the two creatures have similar ovoid bodies. Cryptoclidus
propels itself through the water by “flapping” four paddlelike fins. Its tail is also finned.
Combat
Cryptoclidus normally hunts fish, darting its neck into traveling schools and snapping up prey with its sharp little
teeth. However, it is capable of traveling on the surface of
the water and occasionally seeks larger prey.
Improved Grab (Ex): If cryptoclidus hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +10). If it gets a hold, it can try
to swallow the opponent. Alternatively, the cryptoclidus has
the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but cryptoclidus is not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): Cryptoclidus can swallow a grabbed
opponent that is at least two size categories smaller than itself
by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +10).
Once inside the gullet, the opponent takes 1d8+4 points of
bludgeoning damage plus 1d6+2 points of acid damage per
round from the dinosaur’s digestive juices. A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of the
gullet and return to the mouth, where another successful
DINOSAUR
Cryptoclidus Allosaurus Ankylosaurus
Large Beast (Aquatic) Huge Beast Huge Beast
Hit Dice: 3d10+9 (25 hp) 10d10+30 (85 hp) 9d10+72 (121 hp)
Initiative: +3 +1 –2
Speed: Swim 60 ft. 50 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 16 (–1 size, +3 Dex. +4 natural), 14 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural); 22 (–2 size, –2 Dex, +16 natural);
touch 12, flat-footed 13 touch 9, flat-footed 13 touch 6, flat-footed 22
Attacks: Bite +5 melee Bite +12 melee and 2 claws +7 melee Tail slap +13 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+6 Bite 2d8+7, claw 2d4+3 Tail slap 2d6+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft. 10 ft. by 30 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, swallow whole Improved grab, rake 2d8+3, swallow Trample 2d12+13
whole, trample 5d8+10
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light Darkvision 60 ft., low-light Darkvision 60 ft., low-light
vision, scent vision, scent vision, scent
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +2 Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +5 Fort +14, Ref +4, Will +2
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 17, Str 24, Dex 12, Con 17, Str 29, Dex 7, Con 26,
Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 9 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 11 Int 1, Wis 9, Cha 8
Skills: Hide +4, Listen +6, Spot +6 Listen +9, Spot +10 Listen +4, Spot +4
Climate/Terrain: Warm aquatic Warm forest, hills, plains, Warm forest, hills, plains,
and marsh and marsh
Organization: Solitary or school (20–40) Solitary or pair Solitary, pair, or herd (20–40)
Challenge Rating: 3 7 7
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 4–6 HD (Large); 11–20 HD (Huge); 10–18 HD (Huge);
7–9 HD (Huge) 21–30 HD (Gargantuan) 19–27 HD (Gargantuan)grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed
creature can try to cut its way out with either claws or a light
piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at least 25 points of
damage to the digestive tract (AC 20) in this way creates an
opening large enough to permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole; thus,
another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A
Large cryptoclidus’s gullet can hold 1 Small, 4 Tiny, or 16
Diminutive or smaller opponents.
ALLOSAURUS
Allosaurus is a big flesh-eating dinosaur that inhabits
warm areas. It eats both mammals and
smaller dinosaurs.
Allosaurus is 36 feet long and
weighs 1 1/2 tons. A long tail balances its big head, S-shaped “bulldog”
neck, and bulky
body. It has powerful hind limbs
with clawed feet
and short, strong,
three-fingered forelimbs with digits
ending in impressive
claws. The top of its head
has bony ridges and bumps, and its jaws hold
serrated, bladelike teeth.
Combat
Allosaurus eats everything it can catch. If its prey is too big
to swallow whole, the dinosaur latches on with its powerful
jaws and begins raking until the creature is dead.
Improved Grab (Ex): If allosaurus hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +22). If it gets a hold, it can
attempt to rake in the same round, and the next round it
can try to swallow the opponent. Alternatively, allosaurus
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but allosaurus is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals bite damage and
allows another rake attempt.
Rake (Ex): On any round that allosaurus has a hold on an
opponent (see Improved Grab, above), it can make two rake
attacks (+12 melee) with its hind legs for 2d8+3 points of
damage each. Allosaurus can also attempt to rake when it
pounces on an opponent.
Swallow Whole (Ex): Allosaurus can swallow a grabbed
opponent that is at least two size categories smaller than
itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus
+22). Once inside the gullet, the opponent takes 2d8+12
points of bludgeoning damage and 1d8 points of acid
damage per round from the dinosaur’s digestive juices. A
successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to
climb out of the gullet and return to the mouth, where
another successful grapple check is needed to get free.
Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way
out with either claws or a light piercing or slashing
weapon. Dealing at least 25 points of damage to the digestive tract (AC 20) in this way creates
an opening large enough to
permit escape. Once a single
swallowed creature exits,
muscular action closes the
hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut
its own way out. A Huge
allosaurus’s gullet can
hold 1 Medium-size, 4
Small, 16 Tiny, or
64 Diminutive or
smaller opponents.
Trample (Ex): As
a standard action
during its turn each
round, allosaurus can
trample opponents at least one
size category smaller than itself. This attack
deals 5d8+10 points of bludgeoning damage. A trampled
opponent can attempt either an attack of opportunity at a –4
penalty or a Reflex save (DC 22) for half damage.
ANKYLOSAURUS
Ankylosaurus is a heavily armored, quadrupedal herbivore.
It is a versatile plant-eater, equally at home among temperate forests, humid marshes, and dry grasslands. These
creatues sometimes travel in herds for added protection
from larger predators.
The typical ankylosaurus is 25 to 35 feet in length, 4 1/2 feet
tall, and 7 to 8 feet wide. A bony, armored shell covered with
spikes protects its back and sides, giving the dinosaur the
appearance of some infernally armored siege machine. This
carapace protects the dinosaur from most attacks—indeed,
those who have wounded an ankylosaurus and lived to tell the
tale swear that the only way to harm the beast is to strike it on
its underbelly. Its wide, flat, armored head protects a tiny
brain. Its four legs are quite muscular, and it can rear up on the
hind pair to reach the tender leaves of some of its favorite
plants. Its heavy tail is tipped with a massive club, which the
ankylosaurus can swing with devastating force and accuracy.
This can cause even the most determined predator to think
twice before attempting to make a meal of ankylosaurus.
Combat
Ankylosaurus rarely attacks unless it or its herd is threatened. Though it is slow to action, once this dinosaur views
71
DINOSAUR72
another creature as an enemy, it fights until either it or its
attacker is dead. In battle, it stands put, swinging its tail at
any creature that comes within reach. If it takes 80 or
more points of damage or finds
itself cornered, it attempts to
flee, trampling any creatures in
its path.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, ankylosaurus
can trample opponents
at least one size
category smaller
than itself. This attack
deals 2d12+13 points of
bludgeoning damage. A trampled
opponent can attempt either an
attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC
23) for half damage.
QUETZALCOATLUS
Technically not a dinosaur,
quetzalcoatlus is a massive
flying reptile. This fearsome predator
glides through the skies searching for
meals. Although it is not averse to eating
carrion, it prefers fresh meat or fish.
Quetzalcoatlus has a long neck and
head, and a relatively large brain.
Its “wings” are flaps of skin extended and controlled by its forelimbs and specially evolved fingers.
Combat
When hunting over
water, it flies low and
scoops fish and aquatic
reptiles from just below
the water’s surface. It also attacks small land creatures when it
can find them. Vulnerable to other
predators while it is on the ground,
quetzalcoatlus prefers to swoop
down, snatch its prey in its
DINOSAUR
Quetzalcoatlus Seismosaurus Spinosaurus
Huge Beast Colossal Beast Gargantuan Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+50 (105 hp) 32d10+288 (464 hp) 20d10+120 (230 hp)
Initiative: +1 –1 +1
Speed: 20 ft., fly 100 ft. (poor) 20 ft. 40 ft.
AC: 17 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +8 natural), 11 (–8 size, –1 Dex, +10 natural), 16 (–4 size, +1 Dex, +9 natural),
touch 9, flat-footed 16 touch 1, flat-footed 11 touch 7, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Bite +13 melee and 2 wings Tail slap +31 melee Bite +24 melee and 2 claws +19
+8 melee melee
Damage: Bite 2d10+8, wing 2d6+4 Tail slap 4d10+22 Bite 2d8+13, claw 2d6+6
Space/Reach: 35 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft. 40 ft. by 120 ft./25 ft. 20 ft. by 20 ft./20 ft.
Special Attacks: Swallow whole Trample 10d10+22 Frightful presence, improved
grab, swallow whole, trample
2d8+19
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light Darkvision 60 ft., low-light Darkvision 60 ft., low-light
vision vision, scent vision, scent
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +6 Fort +27, Ref +17, Will +12 Fort +18, Ref +13, Will +8
Abilities: Str 26, Dex 13, Con 20, Str 40, Dex 9, Con 29, Str 36, Dex 13, Con 23,
Int 2, Wis 17, Cha 11 Int 1, Wis 14, Cha 14 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
Skills: Spot +16 Listen +7, Spot +7 Listen +11, Spot +11
Feats: Flyby Attack (B), Snatch (B) — —
Climate/Terrain: Warm forests, hills, mountains Warm forests, plains, hills, Warm forests, plains, hills,
and marsh and marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, or covey (3–5) Solitary, pair, or pod (5–20) Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 8 12 13
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 11–20 HD (Huge); 33–64 HD (Colossal) 21–40 HD (Gargantuan);
21–30 HD (Gargantuan) 41–60 HD (Colossal)jaws, and then struggle to regain altitude while swallowing
its catch.
Swallow Whole (Ex): Quetzalcoatlus can swallow a
snatched opponent that is at least two size categories
smaller than itself by making a successful grapple check
(grapple bonus +23). Once inside the dinosaur, the opponent takes 1d8+4 points of bludgeoning damage and 1d4
points of acid damage per round from its gizzard. A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to
climb out of the gizzard and return to the beak, where
another successful grapple check is needed to get free.
Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out
with either claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon.
Dealing at least 15 points of damage to the gizzard (AC 15)
in this way creates an opening large enough to permit
escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular
action closes the hole;
thus, another swallowed opponent
must cut its own
way out. A Huge
quetzalcoatlus’s
gizzard can hold 1
Medium-size, 4 Small,
16 Tiny, or 64 Diminutive or smaller opponents.
Feats: A creature that
is flung by quetzalcoatlus after being
snatched travels 100
feet and takes 10d6 points of damage. If
quetzalcoatlus is flying, the creature takes
this damage or the appropriate falling
damage, whichever is greater.
SEISMOSAURUS
Seismosaurus is the largest known of the dinosaurs. It feeds
on plants, often defoliating several square miles of terrain
within the course of a few weeks.
Seismosaurus is an immense four-legged dinosaur with a
small head, a bulky body, and a long neck and tail. Its nostrils are located high up on its head.
Combat
Seismosaurus is simply too big to have natural enemies—it
dwarfs even the likes of allosaurus and tyrannosaurus (see
the Monster Manual). Seismosaurus is more likely to inadvertently step on an opponent than to intentionally use its
tail slap attack.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, seismosaurus can trample opponents at least one size
category smaller than itself. This attack deals 10d10+22
points of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can
attempt either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a
Reflex save (DC 41) for half damage.
SPINOSAURUS
Spinosaurus is the largest bipedal predatory dinosaur, towering over even tyrannosaurus. It has longer arms than the
latter, and it occasionally moves about on all fours. Spinosaurus also has a large, saillike, ribbed fin on its back. The
purpose of this appendage is unclear, but spinosaurus has a
relatively flexible spine, so when it arches its back, the sail
spreads. Spinosaurus has a large head
with sharp, straight, nonserrated
teeth set into a powerful, crocodilelike lower jaw.
Combat
Though capable of running
down prey, spinosaurus prefers to freeze opponents in
their places with an unearthly,
soul-searing bellow. When it
must chase prey, it tramples
smaller creatures and grabs
larger ones with its powerful
jaws while tearing with its claws.
Frightful Presence (Ex):
When a spinosaurus bellows (a
standard action), it inspires terror
in all creatures within 30
feet that have fewer Hit
Dice or levels than it has. Each
potentially affected opponent must
succeed at a Will save (DC 20) or
become shaken for 5d6 rounds.
A successful save leaves that
opponent immune to that spinosaurus’s frightful presence for 24 hours.
Improved Grab (Ex): If spinosaurus
hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller
than itself with a bite attack, it deals normal damage and
attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking
an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +40). If it gets a
hold, it can try to swallow the opponent in the next round.
Alternatively, spinosaurus has the option to conduct the
grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but spinosaurus is not
considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): Spinosaurus can swallow a
grabbed opponent that is at least two size categories smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple
bonus +40). Once inside the gullet, the opponent takes
2d8+10 points of bludgeoning damage plus 1d8+4 points of
acid damage per round from the dinosaur’s digestive juices.
A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to
climb out of the gullet and return to the mouth, where
73
DINOSAUR74
another successful grapple check is needed to get free.
Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out
with either claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon.
Dealing at least 25 points of damage to the digestive tract
(AC 20) in this way creates an opening large enough to
permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A Gargantuan spinosaurus’s
gullet can hold 2 Large, 8 Medium-size, 32 Small, or 128
Tiny or smaller opponents.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, spinosaurus can trample opponents at least one size
category smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d8+19 points
of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can
attempt either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or
a Reflex save (DC 33) for half damage.
Skills: Spinosaurus receives
a +2 racial bonus on
Listen and Spot
checks.
DIRE ANIMAL
Dire animals are larger, tougher, and meaner versions of normal animals. They tend to have a feral,
prehistoric look.
COMBAT
Dire animals are fierce fighters that prefer melee combat.
They are territorial, attacking anything that enters their territory or threatens their lairs.
Saving Throws: A dire animal has all good saves.
DIRE TOAD
These amphibians are generally shy and nonagressive. They
usually aren’t dangerous to humanoids.
Combat
Though dire toads are not prone to fighting, they do bite if
disturbed. A dire toad’s tongue attack has a range of 10 feet
with no range increment.
Poison (Ex): A dire toad delivers its poison (Fortitude save
DC 14) with each successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1d6 points of Constitution damage).
Improved Grab (Ex): If a dire toad hits an opponent that
is at least one size category smaller than itself with a bite
attack or a tongue attack, it deals normal damage and
attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking
an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +3). If it gets a hold,
it can try to swallow the opponent. Alternatively, the dire
toad has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or
simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the dire toad is not considered grappled).
In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A dire toad can swallow a
grabbed opponent that is at least one size category smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple
bonus +3). Once inside the toad, the opponent takes 1d6
points of bludgeoning damage plus 1d4 points of acid
damage per round from the dire toad’s stomach. A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb
out of the stomach and return to the toad’s mouth, where
another successful grapple check is needed to get free.
Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way
out with either claws or a light piercing or slashing
weapon. Dealing at
least 10 points of
damage to the gizzard
(AC 13) in this way creates
an opening large enough to
permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action
closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A Mediumsize dire toad’s stomach can hold 2 Small
or 8 Tiny or smaller opponents.
Skills: A dire toad receives a +4 racial
bonus on Hide, Listen, and Spot checks,
and a +8 racial bonus on Jump checks.
DIRE HAWK
This bird of prey is capable of taking down pigs,
sheep, and even the occasional small horse. The dire
hawk prefers high, remote nesting spots.
A typical dire hawk is about 5 feet long and has a wingspan of about 11 feet. The upper part of its beak has a bony
protrusion, and several long feathers trail gracefully from
its lower body and tail.
Skills: *A dire hawk receives a +8 racial bonus on Spot
checks in daylight.
DIRE SNAKE
The dire snake combines the strength and power of a constrictor with the venomous bite of a viper.
The dire snake looks like an enormous viper with dull
green or brown scales and long fangs. Its head has two bony
protrusions similar to horns placed just behind the eyes.
Combat
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a dire
snake can constrict a grabbed opponent, dealing 1d8+10
points of bludgeoning damage.
Poison (Ex): A dire snake delivers its poison (Fortitude
save DC 16) with each successful bite attack. The initial
and secondary damage is the same (1d6 points of Constitution damage).
Improved Grab (Ex): If a dire snake hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
DIRE
ANIMALgrapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +20). If it gets a hold, it can
also constrict in the same round. Thereafter, the
dire snake has the option to conduct the grapple
normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
dire snake is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals bite and constrict damage.
Scent (Ex): A dire snake can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: A dire snake receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide,
Listen, and Spot checks, and a +8
racial bonus on Balance checks.
DIRE HORSE
These aggressive, wild
equines roam the wilderness in herds. Dire horses
resist domestication as much
as any wild animal does.
A dire horse looks like a
large version of a normal
horse except for the
bony plates
on either side
of its head. A dire horse’s hooves often
have jagged edges, and its mane tends to
be shaggy.
Combat
A dire horse usually lashes out with
its hooves and follows up with a
bite attack. It can fight
while carrying a rider, but
the rider cannot also attack
unless he or she succeeds at a
Ride check (DC 10).
Carrying Capacity:
A light load for a dire
horse is up to 519 pounds; a
medium load is 520–1,038
pounds; and a heavy load is
1,039–1,557 pounds. A dire
horse can drag 7,785 pounds.
Scent (Ex): A dire horse can
detect approaching enemies, sniff out
hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
DIRE ELK
A bull dire elk is an imposing
and aggressive beast. Females are less aggressive
75
DIRE
ANIMAL
Dire Horse Dire Elk Dire Elephant
Large Animal Huge Animal Gargantuan Animal
Hit Dice: 8d8+48 (84 hp) 12d8+60 (114 hp) 20d8+200 (290 hp)
Initiative: +1 +0 +0
Speed: 60 ft. 50 ft. 30 ft., climb 10 ft.
AC: 16 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +6 natural), 15 (–2 size, +7 natural), 10 (–4 size, +4 natural),
touch 10, flat-footed 15 touch 8, flat-footed 15 touch 6, flat-footed 10
Attacks: 2 hooves +11 melee and bite Slam +14 melee and 2 hooves Slam +26 melee and 2 stamps
+6 melee +9 melee, or gore +14 melee +21 melee, or gore +26 melee
Damage: Hoof 1d6+6, bite 1d4+3 Slam 2d6+7, hoof 2d4+3, Slam 2d8+15, stamp 2d8+7,
gore 2d8+10 gore 4d6+22
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft. 20 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: — Trample 2d8+10 Trample 4d6+22
Special Qualities: Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +7, Will +8 Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +8 Fort +22, Ref +12, Will +14
Abilities: Str 22, Dex 13, Con 22, Str 24, Dex 11, Con 20, Str 40, Dex 11, Con 30,
Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 11 Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 7 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 7
Skills: Listen +8, Spot +8 Listen +6, Spot +6 Climb +23, Listen +8, Spot +8
Climate/Terrain: Any land Temperate and cold forest, hills, Warm forest and plains
and mountains
Organization: Solitary or herd (6–30) Solitary or herd (6–30) Solitary or herd (6–30)
Challenge Rating: 4 7 10
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 9–16 HD (Large); 13–16 HD (Huge); 21–30 HD (Gargantuan);
17–24 HD (Huge) 17–36 HD (Gargantuan) 31–45 HD (Colossal)76
than males, but a cow dire elk is still formidable when her
calves are threatened.
A dire elk has dark-colored, shaggy hair covering its body.
The bull’s enormous antlers can span up to 12 feet, and he
can weigh up to 3 tons. In the spring, he sheds his antlers, so
his gore attack is not available until he regrows them the following autumn. A female is not antlered, so she never has
access to a gore attack.
Combat
If a bull dire elk believes himself challenged, he tries to
drive off the interloper by bellowing loudly and pawing the
ground. If that doesn’t work, he charges with his head lowered to deliver a vicious gore with his oversized antlers, then
follows up with trample attacks.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a dire elk can trample opponents at least one size category smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d8+10 points of
bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 23) for half damage.
Scent (Ex): A dire elk can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: A dire elk receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide checks.
DIRE ELEPHANT
These titanic herbivores are somewhat unpredictable and
moody. Giants sometimes use dire elephants as mounts or
beasts of burden.
A dire elephant is a much larger version of a normal elephant, with bony plates armoring its spine and huge, vicious
tusks. Its eyes are small and mean.
Combat
A dire elephant attacks by slamming opponents with its
massive trunk, then stamping them into the ground.
When there are several opponents, it usually attempts to
trample them.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a dire elephant can trample opponents at least one
size category smaller than itself. This attack deals 4d6+22
points of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can
attempt either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a
Reflex save (DC 35) for half damage.
Scent (Ex): A dire elephant can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
DIRE
ANIMAL
Dire Toad Dire Hawk Dire Snake
Medium-Size Animal Medium-Size Animal Huge Animal
Hit Dice: 4d8+8 (26 hp) 5d8+10 (32 hp) 7d8+21 (52 hp)
Initiative: +2 +6 +5
Speed: 30 ft. 10 ft., fly 80 ft. (average) 30 ft., climb 20 ft., swim 20 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 Dex, +3 natural), 19 (+6 Dex, +3 natural), 18 (–2 size, +5 Dex, +5 natural),
touch 12, flat-footed 13 touch 16, flat-footed 13 touch 13, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Bite +5 melee, or tongue 2 claws +9 melee and bite +4 melee Bite +10 melee
+5 ranged
Damage: Bite 1d4 plus poison, tongue — Claw 1d4+1, bite 1d6 Bite 2d6 +10 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft. (coiled)/10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison — Constrict 1d6+10, improved
grab, poison
Special Qualities: Low-light vision Low-light vision Low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +6 Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +6 Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +6
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 14, Con 15, Str 12, Dex 22, Con 15, Str 24, Dex 20, Con 16,
Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 7 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 11 Int 1, Wis 13, Cha 11
Skills: Hide +12, Jump +11, Listen + 7, Listen +8, Move Silently +8, Balance +14, Climb +15, Hide
Spot +11 Spot +8* +7, Listen +9, Spot +9
Feats: Weapon Finesse (bite) (B) Weapon Finesse (bite) (B), —
Weapon Finesse (claw) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm land, Any forest, hill, plains, and Temperate and warm land,
aquatic, and underground mountains aquatic, and underground
Organization: Solitary or swarm (10–100) Solitary or pair Solitary
Challenge Rating: 3 2 5
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 5–6 HD (Medium-size); 5–8 HD (Medium-size); 8–12 HD (Huge);
7–10 HD (Large) 9–12 HD (Large) 13–16 HD (Gargantuan)DRAGON, GEM
Gem dragons are a subcategory of dragons that spend much
of their time on the Inner Planes. All are psionically powerful, although to most observers their psychic talents are
indistinguishable from sorcery. Gem dragons tend to be
aloof, solitary, and self-centered.
All dragons become more powerful as they age. They
range in length from several feet upon hatching to more
than 100 feet after attaining the status of great wyrm.
Dragon Age Categories
Category Age (Years)
1 Wyrmling 0–5
2 Very young 6–15
3 Young 16–25
4 Juvenile 26–50
5 Young adult 51–100
6 Adult 101–200
7 Mature adult 201–400
8 Old 401–600
9 Very old 601–800
10 Ancient 801–1,000
11 Wyrm 1,001–1,200
12 Great wyrm 1,201+
Living primarily on the Inner Planes, gem dragons have
developed unusual diets. While they enjoy variety in their
meals, they can survive indefinitely by consuming elemental matter. The gem dragons are not native to the Inner
Planes, and all kinds of gem dragons can be found on all the
planes, but they do have favored environments.
Like all dragons, gem dragons are incredibly covetous.
They hoard wealth, collecting mounds of coins and gathering as many gems, jewels, and magic items as possible.
Those with large hoards become slightly paranoid, venturing out of their lairs only to patrol the immediate area or to
get food. For dragons, there is never enough treasure: It’s
pleasing to look at, and they bask in its radiance. Dragons
like to make beds of their hoards, shaping nooks and
mounds to fit their bodies. By the time a dragon matures to
the great wyrm stage, hundreds of gems and coins are
embedded in its hide.
All dragons speak Draconic.
SIZE
A dragon’s face and reach increase with its size according to
the Dragon Face and Reach table, below.
Dragon Face and Reach
Size Face Reach
Tiny 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft. 5 ft.*
Small 5 ft. by 5 ft. 5 ft.
Medium-size 5 ft. by 5 ft. 5 ft.
Large 5 ft. by 10 ft. 10 ft.*
Huge 10 ft. by 20 ft. 10 ft.
Gargantuan 20 ft. by 40 ft. 15 ft.
Colossal 40 ft. by 80 ft. 15 ft.
*Greater than normal reach for a creature of this size.
COMBAT
At its younger ages, a dragon attacks with its powerful
claws and bite. As it grows older and larger, it acquires
other attack forms as well (see Dragon Attacks, below). In
addition, it can use a breath weapon, and it may also have
access to various special abilities specific to its kind (see
individual descriptions).
A dragon usually prefers to fight on the wing, staying
out of reach until it has worn down the enemy with
ranged attacks. Older, more intelligent dragons are adept
at sizing up the opposition and eliminating the most dangerous foes first—or avoiding them while it picks off
weaker enemies.
The table below describes the physical attacks a dragon
gains as it grows larger. The last two rows of the table give
the attack modifiers and damage modifiers for each attack.
The dragon gets its full attack bonus for its bite, which is
always its primary attack. Claw, wing, and tail slap attacks
are all secondary, so these are made at a –5 penalty. Crush
and tail sweep are special attacks that do not require attack
rolls (see below). To determine the damage bonus for each
attack, multiply the value given in the last row by the
dragon’s Str bonus.
Dragon Attacks
Tail Tail
Size Bite Claw Wing Slap Crush Sweep
Tiny 1d4 1d3 — — — —
Small 1d6 1d4 — — — —
Medium-size 1d8 1d6 1d4 — — —
Large 2d6 1d8 1d6 1d8 — —
Huge 2d8 2d6 1d8 2d6 2d8 —
Gargantuan 4d6 2d8 2d6 2d8 4d6 2d6
Colossal 4d8 4d6 2d8 4d6 4d8 2d8
Attack Bonus full –5 –5 –5 Reflex save Reflex save
Damage Bonus ×1 ×0.5 ×0.5 ×1.5 ×1.5 ×1.5
Bite: A dragon can also use its bite to snatch opponents
(see the Snatch feat description in the introduction).
Claw: A dragon can also use its claws to snatch opponents
(see the Snatch feat description in the introduction).
Wing: A dragon can slam opponents with its wings, even
when flying.
Tail Slap: A dragon can slap one opponent each round
with its tail.
Crush: A flying or jumping dragon of at least Huge size
can land on opponents three or more size categories smaller
than itself as a standard action, using its whole body to crush
them. (Of course, it can still attempt normal overrun or
grapple attacks against larger opponents.) A crush attack
affects as many creatures as can fit under the dragon’s body
(see Dragon Face and Reach Table, above). Each creature in
the affected area must succeed at a Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2
dragon’s HD + dragon’s Constitution modifier) or be pinned,
automatically taking the listed amount of bludgeoning
damage. Thereafter, if the dragon chooses to maintain the
77
DRAGON78
pin, treat it as a normal grapple attack. While pinned, the
opponent takes crush damage each round.
Tail Sweep: A dragon of at least Gargantuan size can
sweep with its tail as a standard action. The sweep affects
creatures four or more size categories smaller than the
dragon within a half-circle (diameter 30 feet for a Gargantuan dragon or 40 feet for a Colossal dragon), centered on
the dragon’s rear. Each affected creature that fails a Reflex
save (DC 10 + 1/2 dragon’s HD + dragon’s Constitution
modifier) takes the listed damage; a successful save halves
the damage.
Grappling: Dragons do not favor grapple attacks, though
their crush attacks and the Snatch feat (see the introduction) use normal grapple rules.
If grappled by a creature the same size category as itself or
larger, a dragon can return the attack with its bite and all four
legs (the rear legs deal claw damage). If snatched or crushed
by a larger dragon, a dragon can respond only with grapple
attacks to try winning free, or with bite or breath weapon
attacks. If grappled by a creature smaller than itself, the
dragon can respond with any of its physical attacks other
than a tail sweep.
A dragon can always use its breath weapon while grappling, as well as its spell-like or supernatural abilities, provided it succeeds at a Concentration check.
Breath Weapon (Su): Using a breath weapon is a standard
action. Once a dragon breathes, it must wait 1d4 rounds to do
so again. A blast from a breath weapon always starts at the
dragon’s mouth and extends in a direction of its choice, with
an area as noted below. If the breath weapon deals damage,
each creature caught in the area can attempt a Reflex save
(DC 10 + 1/2 dragon’s HD + dragon’s Charisma modifier; see
individual entries for specific DCs) to take half damage.
Saves against nondamaging breath weapons use the same
DCs, but the types vary as noted in the variety descriptions.
Breath weapons come in two basic shapes: line and cone.
The areas vary with the dragon’s size, as shown on the
table below.
Dragon Breath Weapons
Dragon Size Line* (Length) Cone** (Length)
Tiny 30 ft. 15 ft.
Small 40 ft. 20 ft.
Medium-size 60 ft. 30 ft.
Large 80 ft. 40 ft.
Huge 100 ft. 50 ft.
Gargantuan 120 ft. 60 ft.
Colossal 140 ft. 70 ft.
*A line is always 5 feet high and 5 feet wide.
**A cone is as high and wide as its length.
Frightful Presence (Ex): A young adult or older dragon
can unsettle foes with its mere presence. The ability takes
effect automatically whenever the dragon attacks, charges,
or flies overhead. Creatures within a radius of 30 feet × the
dragon’s age category are subject to the effect if they have
fewer HD than the dragon.
A potentially affected creature that succeeds at a Will save
(DC 10 + 1/2 dragon’s HD + dragon’s Charisma modifier)
remains immune to that dragon’s frightful presence for 24
hours. On a failure, a creature with 4 or fewer Hit Dice
becomes panicked for 4d6 rounds; one with 5 or more Hit
Dice becomes shaken for 4d6 rounds. Dragons ignore the
frightful presence of other dragons.
Special Abilities: A gem dragon’s special abilities depend
on its age and kind. It gains the abilities given for its age category plus all previous ones. The save DC is 10 + dragon’s
Charisma modifier + spell level.
Psionics (Sp): All gem dragons have psionic abilities, as
given in their descriptive text. (When using the Psionics
Handbook, treat a gem dragon’s spell resistance as power
resistance.)
Blindsight (Ex): A dragon can ascertain its surroundings
by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and scent, but also by
noticing vibration and other environmental clues). This
ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within a
range of 30 feet × the dragon’s age category. The dragon usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice
creatures within range of its blindsight.
Immunities (Ex): All dragons are immune to sleep and
paralysis effects. Each kind of dragon is immune to one or
two additional forms of attack no matter what its age, as
given in its description.
Keen Senses (Ex): A dragon sees four times as well as a
human in low-light conditions and twice as well in normal
light. It also has darkvision with a range of 100 feet × the
dragon’s age category.
Skills: Every dragon starts with 6 skill points per Hit Die,
plus bonus points equal to its Intelligence modifier × HD.
The following skills are class skills for all dragons: Bluff,
Concentration, Diplomacy, Escape Artist, Knowledge (any),
Listen, Scry, Spot, and Search. Dragons cannot gain skills
that are exclusive to a class.
Feats: Each dragon has one feat, plus an additional feat per
4 HD. Dragons favor Alertness, Cleave (claw or tail slap attacks
only), Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Sunder, and Weapon
Focus (claw or bite). They can also choose from the following
feats, all of which are described in the Creature Feats sidebar in
the introduction of this book: Ability Focus, Flyby Attack,
Hover, Quicken Spell-Like Ability, Snatch, and Wingover.
Hover: If a dragon hovers close to the ground in an area
with lots of loose debris, the draft from its wings creates a
hemispherical cloud with a radius of 30 feet × the dragon’s
age category.
Snatch: A creature that is flung by a gem dragon after
being snatched travels 10 feet and takes 1d6 points of
damage per age category. If the dragon is flying, the creature
takes this damage or the appropriate falling damage,
whichever is greater.
Planar Travel (Su): Gem dragons have the innate ability
to pass instantly between the Material Plane and the Inner
Planes, where they often make their homes.
DRAGONResistances (Ex): Unless otherwise noted in an individual dragon’s description, each gem dragon has fire
resistance 30.
Movement: Each gem dragon has a swim speed and
a burrow speed, in addition to being able to fly. Only the
topaz dragon can breathe underwater, so the others are
limited to surface areas—although older dragons
can hold their breath for very long periods.
AMETHYST DRAGON
Dragon (Earth)
Climate/Terrain: Inner Planes, underground
Organization: Wyrmling, very young,
young, juvenile, and young adult: solitary or clutch (2–5); adult, mature adult,
old, very old, ancient, wyrm, or great
wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1–2 plus
2–5 offspring)
Challenge Ratings: Wyrmling 3; very
young 4; young 6; juvenile 8; young
adult 11; adult 14; mature adult 16; old 18; very old 19;
ancient 21; wyrm 23; great wyrm 25
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: Wyrmling 7–8 HD (Small); very young
10–11 HD (Medium-size); young 13–14 HD (Mediumsize); juvenile 16–17 HD (Large); young adult 19–20 HD
(Large); adult 22–23 HD (Huge); mature adult 25–26 HD
(Huge); old 28–29 HD (Huge); very old 31–32 HD
(Huge); ancient 34–35 HD (Gargantuan); wyrm 37–38
HD (Gargantuan); great wyrm 40+ HD (Gargantuan)
Amethyst dragons are wise and regal. They sometimes serve
as intermediaries between warring dragons, or even
humanoid civilizations.
An amethyst dragon has lavender skin and scales that
are shaped like naturally formed mineral crystals. When it
first hatches, its scales are a light, translucent purple shade.
As it grows older, they gradually darken and take on a crystalline quality.
Most amethyst dragons live in
hollowed-out spaces on the Elemental Plane of Earth.
These caverns can consist of many passages and chambers
resplendent with crystals of all colors.
Combat
Younger amethyst dragons avoid combat by flying away if possible. Older ones use their special abilities, such as invisibility,
to improve their chances of catching a target flat-footed. Even
adults flee if it is obvious after the first few rounds of combat
that they cannot overpower their opposition.
If an amethyst dragon is fighting to protect its lair or its
young, however, it seldom flees a battle. A younger one uses
its spell-like abilities, breath weapon, feats that are usable
when flying, and any magic items it owns, while an older
and larger one uses grapple, snatch, and crush attacks to
even the odds.
79
DRAGON
Amethyst Dragons by Age
Attack Fort Ref Will Breath Frightful
Age Size Hit Dice (hp) Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha Bonus Save Save Save Weapon (DC) Presence DC SR
Wyrmling S 6d12+6 (45) 13 12 13 10 11 10 +8 +6 +5 +5 2d8 (14) — —
Very young M 9d12+18 (76) 15 12 15 10 11 10 +11 +8 +6 +6 4d8 (16) — —
Young M 12d12+24 (102) 17 12 15 12 13 12 +15 +10 +8 +9 6d8 (18) — —
Juvenile L 15d12+45 (142) 19 12 17 14 15 14 +18 +12 +9 +11 8d8 (20) — —
Young adult L 18d12+72 (189) 23 12 19 14 15 14 +23 +15 +11 +13 10d8 (23) 21 19
Adult H 21d12+105 (241) 27 12 21 16 17 16 +27 +17 +12 +15 12d8 (25) 23 21
Mature adult H 24d12+120 (276) 29 12 21 16 17 16 +31 +19 +14 +17 14d8 (27) 25 22
Old H 27d12+162 (337) 31 12 23 18 19 18 +35 +21 +15 +19 16d8 (29) 27 24
Very old H 30d12+180 (375) 33 12 23 18 19 18 +39 +23 +17 +21 18d8 (31) 29 25
Ancient G 33d12+231 (445) 35 12 25 20 21 20 +41 +25 +18 +23 20d8 (33) 31 27
Wyrm G 36d12+280 (507) 37 12 27 20 21 20 +44 +27 +20 +24 22d8 (35) 33 29
Great wyrm G 39d12+312 (565) 39 12 27 22 23 22 +49 +29 +22 +27 24d8 (37) 35 3180
Breath Weapon (Su): An amethyst dragon has one
breath weapon, a line of concussive force. It can choose to
deal subdual damage instead of normal damage.
Explosive Gem (Sp): Once per day, an amethyst dragon can
spit a violet, crystalline lozenge up to 75 feet away with pinpoint accuracy. The gem explodes on impact, dealing bludgeoning damage to all creatures within a 20-foot radius. A target
that succeeds at a Reflex saving throw (DC 17 +
dragon’s age category) takes half damage.
Amethyst Telekinesis (Sp): Once
per day, an amethyst great wyrm
can use a telekinesis effect. With
this ability, it can lift up to 10 tons
or hurl a Large or smaller
creature against another
object. The impact deals
20d6 points of damage to
a Large creature, 15d6 to
a Medium-size one, 10d6
to a Small one, 5d6 to a
Tiny one, or 1d6 to a Diminutive or Fine creature.
Force Resistant (Ex):
An amethyst dragon gains
a +4 bonus on saving throws
against force-based effects
such as magic missile.
Stomp (Su): By stamping its
foot, an amethyst dragon precipitates a shock wave that travels along the ground, toppling creatures and loose objects
within 20 feet. The area is conelike and extends beneath the
surface of the ground. (Any creatures above the surface are
not affected.) Any creature standing in the area that fails its
Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2 dragon’s Hit Dice + dragon’s
Strength modifier) is thrown to the ground and takes 1d4
points of subdual damage. This ability is usable three times
per day. (When using the Psionics Handbook, replace this ability with the psionic power stomp.)
Body Equilibrium (Sp): Once per day, the dragon can
adjust its body equilibrium to correspond with any solid or
liquid. Thus, it can walk on water, quicksand, or even a spider’s web without sinking or breaking through.
(This does not confer any resistance
to particularly sticky webs.) Movement is at normal speed, but running on a fragile, mushy, or liquid
surface requires a Dexterity check
(DC 10 or more, depending on
the surface) to avoid breaking
through. Falling damage is
halved while this power is
in effect. Body equilibrium
lasts 1 minute per age category. (When using the Psionics
Handbook, replace this ability
with the psionic power
body equilibrium.)
Psionics (Sp): 1/day—
invisibility, suggestion. Caster
(or manifester) level varies by age; save DC 10 +
dragon’s Charisma modifier + spell (or power) level.
Attack/Defense Modes: ego whip/mental barrier. An amethyst
dragon manifests powers, and gains additional attack and
defense modes, as if it were a psion with Psychokinesis as
its primary discipline.
DRAGON
Amethyst Dragon Abilities by Age
Age Speed Initiative AC Special Abilities Caster Level
Wyrmling 40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), +1 17 (+1 size, +5 natural, +1 Dex), Force resistant, planar travel, —
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 16 poison immunity
Very young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 19 (+8 natural, +1 Dex), —
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 11, flat-footed 18
Young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 22 (+11 natural, +1 Dex), —
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 11, flat-footed 21
Juvenile 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 24 (–1 size, +14 natural, +1 Dex), Stomp 1st
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 23
Young adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 27 (–1 size, +17 natural, +1 Dex), DR 5/+1 3rd
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 26
Adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 29 (–2 size, +20 natural, +1 Dex), Explosive gem (5d6), 5th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 28 invisibility
Mature adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 32 (–2 size, +23 natural, +1 Dex), DR 10/+1 7th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 31
Old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 35 (–2 size, +26 natural, +1 Dex), Body equilibrium, 9th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 34 explosive gem (9d6)
Very old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +1 38 (–2 size, +29 natural, +1 Dex), DR 15/+2 11th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 37
Ancient 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +1 39 (–4 size, +32 natural, +1 Dex), Explosive gem (13d6), 13th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 7, flat-footed 38 suggestion
Wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +1 42 (–4 size, +35 natural, +1 Dex), DR 20/+3 15th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 7, flat-footed 41
Great wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +1 45 (–4 size, +38 natural, +1 Dex), Amethyst telekinesis 17th
burrow 20 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 7, flat-footed 44CRYSTAL DRAGON
Dragon (Air)
Climate/Terrain: Inner Planes, temperate and cold
mountains
Organization: Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile,
and young adult: solitary or clutch (2–5); adult, mature
adult, old, very old, ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1–2 plus 2–5 offspring)
Challenge Ratings: Wyrmling 2; very young 3; young 4;
juvenile 7; young adult 10; adult 12; mature adult 15; old
17; very old 18; ancient 20; wyrm 21; great wyrm 23
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: Wyrmling 6–7 HD (Small); very young
9–10 HD (Medium-size); young 12–13 HD (Mediumsize); juvenile 15–16 HD (Large); young adult 18–19
HD (Large); adult 21–22 HD (Huge); mature adult
24–25 HD (Huge); old 27–28 HD (Huge); very old
30–31 HD (Huge); ancient 33–34 HD (Gargantuan);
wyrm 36–37 HD (Gargantuan); great wyrm 39+ HD
(Gargantuan)
Crystal dragons are the friendliest of the gem dragons.
They are always curious about the world, so they enthusiastically converse with willing visitors.
A wyrmling crystal dragon’s scales are glossy white. As it
ages, its scales become translucent. Moonlight and starlight
cause them to luminesce, and full sunlight lends them a dazzling brilliance.
Crystal dragons prefer the Elemental Plane of Air, but
they sometimes build incredible ice palaces atop high, cold
mountain peaks on the Material Plane, where they can
watch the stars and create sculptures out of ice and snow.
White dragons and crystal dragons sometimes come into
conflict. Crystal dragons have been known to make off
with white dragon eggs, possibly to foster the white wyrmlings and help them grow into friendlier dragons than they
would otherwise become. Such white dragons are extremely
81
DRAGON
Crystal Dragons by Age
Attack Fort Ref Will Breath Frightful
Age Size Hit Dice (hp) Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha Bonus Save Save Save Weapon (DC) Presence DC SR
Wyrmling S 5d12+5 (37) 13 10 13 10 11 11 +7 +5 +4 +4 2d6 (13) — —
Very young M 8d12+16 (68) 15 10 15 10 11 11 +10 +8 +6 +6 4d6 (16) — —
Young M 11d12+22 (93) 17 10 15 12 13 13 +14 +9 +7 +8 6d6 (17) — —
Juvenile L 14d12+42 (133) 19 10 17 14 15 15 +17 +12 +9 +11 8d6 (20) — —
Young adult L 17d12+68 (178) 23 10 19 14 15 15 +22 +14 +10 +12 10d6 (22) 20 19
Adult H 20d12+100 (230) 27 10 21 16 17 17 +26 +17 +12 +15 12d6 (25) 23 21
Mature adult H 23d12+115 (264) 29 10 21 16 17 17 +30 +18 +13 +16 14d6 (26) 24 22
Old H 26d12+156 (325) 31 10 23 18 19 19 +34 +21 +15 +19 16d6 (29) 27 24
Very old H 29d12+174 (362) 33 10 23 18 19 19 +38 +22 +16 +20 18d6 (30) 28 25
Ancient G 32d12+224 (432) 35 10 25 20 21 21 +40 +25 +18 +23 20d6 (33) 31 27
Wyrm G 35d12+280 (507) 37 10 27 20 21 21 +44 +27 +19 +24 22d6 (35) 32 28
Great wyrm G 38d12+304 (551) 39 10 27 22 23 21 +48 +29 +21 +27 24d6 (37) 34 30
Crystal Dragon Abilities by Age
Age Speed Initiative AC Special Abilities Caster Level
Wyrmling 40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), +0 15 (+1 size, +4 natural), Cold immunity, planar travel —
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 11, flat-footed 15
Very young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 17 (+7 natural), —
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 17
Young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 20 (+10 natural), —
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 20
Juvenile 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 22 (–1 size, +13 natural), —
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 22
Young adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 25 (–1 size, +16 natural), DR 5/+1 —
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 25
Adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 27 (–2 size, +19 natural), Charm person 5th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 27
Mature adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 30 (–2 size, +22 natural), DR 10/+1 7th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 30
Old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 33 (–2 size, +25 natural), Color spray 9th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 33
Very old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 36 (–2 size, +28 natural), DR 15/+2 11th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 36
Ancient 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 37 (–4 size, +31 natural), Domination 13th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 37
Wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 40 (–4 size, +34 natural), DR 20/+2 15th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 40
Great wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 43 (–4 size, +37 natural), Control winds 17th
burrow 5 ft., swim 40 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 4382
rare, and the introduction of such creatures into a campaign is the purview of the DM. Crystal dragons tend to
bear great enmity toward any local giants, since the latter
occasionally join forces with white dragons to hunt for crystal dragon lairs or wyrmlings.
Combat
A crystal dragon rarely instigates a fight without cause. If a
visitor is intriguing or seems friendly, the dragon attempts a
conversation; otherwise it tries to avoid a meeting. If visitors
dare to attack, however, a crystal dragon does not hesitate to
respond in kind. It often uses its breath weapon first to
weaken and blind foes, then takes to the air to make use of
its psionic abilities and any other ranged attacks it has.
Breath Weapon (Su): A crystal dragon’s breath weapon
is a cone of brilliant light. A target who fails his or her
Reflex saving throw takes the indicated damage and is
blinded for 1d4 rounds.
Spell-Like Abilities: 3/day—color spray; 1/day—control
winds. (When using the Psionics
Handbook, replace control
winds with the control air
psionic power.) Caster
level varies by age; save
DC 10 + dragon’s Charisma modifier +
spell level.
Psionics (Sp):
3/day—charm person; 1/day—domination.
Caster (or manifester)
level varies by age;
save DC 10 + dragon’s Charisma
modifier + spell
(or power) level.
Attack/Defense Modes:
id insinuation/thought shield. A crystal
dragon manifests powers, and gains additional attack and defense modes, as if it were
a psion with Telepathy as its primary discipline.
EMERALD DRAGON
Dragon (Air)
Climate/Terrain: Inner Planes, underground
Organization: Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile,
and young adult: solitary or clutch (2–5); adult, mature
adult, old, very old, ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1–2 plus 2–5 offspring)
Challenge Ratings: Wyrmling 2; very young 4; young
6; juvenile 8; young adult 11; adult 14; mature adult
16; old 18; very old 19; ancient 21; wyrm 22; great
wyrm 24
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always lawful neutral
Advancement: Wyrmling 7–8 HD (Small); very young
10–11 HD (Medium-size); young 13–14 HD (Mediumsize); juvenile 16–17 HD (Large); young adult 19–20
HD (Large); adult 22–23 HD (Huge); mature adult
25–26 HD (Huge); old 28–29 HD (Huge); very old
31–32 HD (Huge); ancient 34–35 HD (Gargantuan);
wyrm 37–38 HD (Gargantuan); great wyrm 40+ HD
(Gargantuan)
Emerald dragons are inquisitive, particularly about local history and customs. Often, their knowledge of particular areas
surpasses that of the best sage. However, these dragons are
also rather paranoid, so developing even a passing acquaintance with one can be quite difficult.
The scales of a wyrmling emerald dragon are translucent and sea-green. As it ages, its scales harden and take
on every shade of green from deep emerald to mint, and
they scintillate in even the dimmest light. An emerald
dragon’s pupils fade as it ages, so by
the time it becomes a great wyrm,
its eyes are featureless, glowing, green orbs.
The typical emerald
dragon likes to settle
near an area that is at
least partly inhabited
by civilized beings
(of any type), but
not so near that
its presence becomes
generally known.
On the Material
Plane, such dragons
make their lairs in the cones
of extinct (or seldom active)
volcanoes. While on the Inner
Planes, these dragons still
watch their favored Material Plane spots.
Emerald dragons nurture their wyrmlings, so any given
lair of a young adult or older dragon is likely to include at
least one wyrmling.
Combat
Emerald dragons are quite distrustful of visitors, and their
lairs bristle with hidden traps and both magic and mundane alarms. Should these measures fail to deter visitors,
an emerald dragon first hides (with improved invisibility, if
available), but reveals its presence if its treasure or its
hatchlings are discovered.
When attacking, an emerald dragon prefers to blind its
opponents with fog cloud, and then charge (or if it is flying,
snatch up its opponents). These dragons are the least reluctant of all the gem dragons to engage foes in melee
before thoroughly softening them up from a distance.
DRAGONAgainst seafaring opponents, an emerald dragon usually
either conjures up a storm or uses its tail to smash all the vessels it can reach (first the masts, then the hulls). If the creature is inclined toward leniency, it might merely becalm the
ships, leave them fogbound, or snap some of their masts
before allowing them to limp to safety. Alternatively, an
emerald dragon might simply herd the nearly helpless ships
to a location of its choice, thoroughly examine the crew and
cargo, then either loot the vessel or hold the ship and its
contents for ransom.
Breath Weapon (Su): An emerald dragon breathes a
cone of keening sonic energy. In addition to making a
Reflex saving throw against sonic damage, each creature
within the cone must succeed at a Fortitude save (same DC)
or be deafened for 1d4 rounds plus 1 round per age category of the dragon.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—legend lore; 3/day—fog
cloud, improved invisibility, sculpt sound. (When using the
Psionics Handbook, replace legend lore with the object reading
psionic power, replace sculpt sound with the control sound
psionic power, and replace improved invisibility with the augmented invisibility psionic power.) Caster level varies with
age; save DC 10 + dragon’s Charisma modifier + spell level.
Psionics (Sp): 3/day—nondetection, clairaudience/clairvoyance. Caster (or manifester) level varies by age; save DC 10 +
dragon’s Charisma modifier + spell (or power) level.
Attack/Defense Modes: id insinuation, psychic crush/thought
shield, tower of iron will. An emerald dragon manifests
powers, and gains additional attack and defense modes, as if
it were a psion with Clairsentience as its primary discipline.
Shield of Prudence (Sp): A great wyrm emerald dragon can
extend its awareness a few fractions of a second into the
future. This ability gives it a +6 insight bonus to AC for 6
hours. If it is caught flat-footed, it still gains a +4 insight
bonus to AC. Shield of prudence is usable three times per day.
(When using the Psionics Handbook, replace this with the
shield of prudence psionic power.)
83
DRAGON
Emerald Dragons by Age
Attack Fort Ref Will Breath Frightful
Age Size Hit Dice (hp) Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha Bonus Save Save Save Weapon (DC) Presence DC SR
Wyrmling S 6d12+6 (45) 13 10 13 14 15 14 +8 +6 +5 +7 2d6 (14) — —
Very young M 9d12+18 (76) 15 10 15 14 15 14 +11 +8 +6 +8 4d6 (16) — —
Young M 12d12+24 (102) 17 10 15 16 17 16 +15 +10 +8 +11 6d6 (18) — —
Juvenile L 15d12+45 (142) 19 10 17 18 19 18 +18 +12 +9 +13 8d6 (20) — —
Young adult L 18d12+72 (189) 23 10 19 18 19 18 +23 +15 +11 +15 10d6 (23) 23 20
Adult H 21d12+105 (241) 27 10 21 20 21 20 +27 +17 +12 +17 12d6 (25) 25 22
Mature adult H 24d12+120 (276) 29 10 21 20 21 20 +31 +19 +14 +19 14d6 (27) 27 23
Old H 27d12+162 (337) 31 10 23 22 23 22 +35 +21 +15 +21 16d6 (29) 29 25
Very old H 30d12+180 (375) 33 10 23 22 23 22 +39 +23 +17 +23 18d6 (31) 31 26
Ancient G 33d12+231 (445) 35 10 25 24 25 24 +41 +25 +18 +25 20d6 (33) 33 28
Wyrm G 36d12+288 (522) 37 10 27 26 27 26 +45 +28 +20 +28 22d6 (36) 36 29
Great wyrm G 39d12+312 (565) 39 10 27 26 27 26 +49 +29 +21 +29 24d6 (37) 37 31
Emerald Dragon Abilities by Age
Age Speed Initiative AC Special Abilities Caster Level
Wyrmling 40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average) +0 16 (+1 size, +5 natural), Object reading, planar travel, —
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 11, flat-footed 16 sonic immunity
Very young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 18 (+8 natural), —
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 18
Young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 21 (+11 natural), Improved invisibility 1st
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 21
Juvenile 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 23 (–1 size, +14 natural), Fog cloud 3rd
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 23
Young adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 26 (–1 size, +17 natural), DR 5/+1 5th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 26
Adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 28 (–2 size, +20 natural), Legend lore 7th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 28
Mature adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 31 (–2 size, +23 natural), DR 10/+1 9th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 31
Old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 34 (–2 size, +26 natural), Clairaudience/clairvoyance, 11th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 34 nondetection
Very old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 37 (–2 size, +29 natural), DR 15/+2 13th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 37
Ancient 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 38 (–4 size, +32 natural), Sculpt sound 15th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 38
Wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 41 (–4 size, +35 natural), DR 20/+3 17th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 41
Great wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 44 (–4 size, +38 natural), Shield of prudence 19th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 4484
SAPPHIRE DRAGON
Dragon (Earth)
Climate/Terrain: Inner Planes, underground
Organization: Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile,
and young adult: solitary or clutch (2–5); adult, mature
adult, old, very old, ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1–2 plus 2–5 offspring)
Challenge Ratings: Wyrmling 2; very young 4; young 6;
juvenile 8; young adult 10; adult 13; mature adult 15; old
18; very old 19; ancient 21; wyrm 22; great wyrm 24
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always lawful neutral
Advancement: Wyrmling 6–7 HD (Tiny); very young 9–10
HD (Small); young 12–13 HD (Medium-size); juvenile
15–16 HD (Medium-size); young adult 18–19 HD (Large);
adult 21–22 HD (Large); mature adult 24–25 HD (Huge);
old 27–28 HD (Huge); very
old 30–31 HD (Huge);
ancient 33–34 HD
(Huge); wyrm 36–37
HD (Gargantuan);
great wyrm 39+ HD
(Gargantuan)
Sapphire dragons are
quite territorial, particularly when it comes to
other dragons that encroach on their territories,
either on the Elemental
Plane of Earth, or in the
areas of the Material Plane
that they call their own.
Sapphire dragons
tend to be antisocial toward all
beings, but they view the
evil races of the Underdark as particular enemies and sometimes come into direct conflict with them over underground territory. These dragons don’t go in for small talk
unless the discussion revolves around military strategy, a
subject on which they consider themselves experts, if not
geniuses. In fact, a sapphire dragon may forgive visitors
their presence if they offer it a game of strategy. Of course, it
is never wise to let the dragon lose.
A sapphire dragon’s scales range from light to dark blue in
color, and they scintillate in any light, creating a cascade of
ghostly glints on the walls of the caverns in which these
creatures often lair. Unlike the scales of other gem dragons,
those of a sapphire dragon do not change as the creature
ages. Its pupils fade with time, however, so by the time it
becomes a great wyrm, its eyes are featureless, glowing, sapphire orbs.
Sapphire dragons love the Elemental Plane of Earth, but
they also like to lair in deep, dry, rocky caverns on the Material Plane. The typical sapphire dragon uses move earth and
stone shape to hide the entrance to its lair. Inside, it spreads
out its treasures through several
chambers, arranging them in
a somewhat decorative
manner. Drow, illithid,
and aboleth trophies are
often prominently displayed to remind the dragon
of its past victories over its
enemies. A sapphire dragon
often allows Large monstrous spiders to roam its
lair, but only as a handy
source of food. To keep such
creatures close, the dragon
also frequently allows
their favorite prey
species to inhabit portions of its lair.
Combat
A sapphire dragon uses
its spider climb and teleport abilities to confuse its opponents and try to catch them
flat-footed. It also uses its skate ability to enhance its own
movement or push heavy objects down slopes at its enemies.
DRAGON
Sapphire Dragons by Age
Attack Fort Ref Will Breath Frightful
Age Size Hit Dice (hp) Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha Bonus Save Save Save Weapon (DC) Presence DC SR
Wyrmling T 5d12+5 (37) 11 12 13 12 13 12 +7 +5 +5 +5 2d4 (13) — —
Very young S 8d12+8 (60) 13 12 13 12 13 12 +10 +7 +7 +7 4d4 (15) — —
Young M 11d12+22 (93) 15 14 15 14 15 14 +13 +9 +9 +9 6d4 (17) — —
Juvenile M 14d12+28 (119) 17 14 15 14 15 14 +17 +11 +11 +11 8d4 (19) — —
Young adult L 17d12+51 (161) 19 16 17 16 17 16 +20 +13 +13 +13 10d4 (21) 21 19
Adult L 20d12+60 (190) 23 16 19 16 17 16 +25 +16 +15 +15 12d4 (24) 23 21
Mature adult H 23d12+115 (264) 27 18 21 18 19 18 +29 +18 +17 +17 14d4 (26) 25 23
Old H 26d12+130 (299) 29 18 21 18 19 18 +33 +20 +19 +19 16d4 (28) 27 25
Very old H 29d12+174 (362) 31 20 23 20 21 20 +37 +22 +21 +21 18d4 (30) 29 26
Ancient H 32d12+192 (400) 33 20 23 20 21 20 +41 +24 +23 +23 20d4 (32) 31 28
Wyrm G 35d12+245 (472) 35 22 25 22 23 22 +43 +26 +25 +25 22d4 (34) 33 29
Great wyrm G 38d12+304 (551) 37 22 27 22 23 22 +47 +29 +27 +27 24d4 (37) 35 31It enjoys panicking creatures with its breath weapon, then
using its skate ability to facilitate their departure.
Breath Weapon (Su): A sapphire dragon breathes a cone
of nearly inaudible sonic energy. In addition to making a
Reflex saving throw against sonic damage, each creature
within the cone must succeed at a Will save (same DC) or
become panicked for 1d4 rounds.
Spider Climb (Ex): A sapphire dragon can climb on
stone surfaces as though using the spider climb spell. This
ability is always active.
Sense Psychoportation (Su): The dragon can sense the
use of any power or spell that enhances movement or allows
instant transit from one place to another. This ability is
always active, and it functions at a range of 100 feet + 10 feet
per caster level of the detected power or spell. The dragon
does not need a line of sight; it is instantly aware of the distance and direction to the detected power. (When using the
Psionics Handbook, replace this ability with the sense psychoportation psionic power.)
Skate (Sp): This ability allows the sapphire dragon,
another willing creature, or an unattended object to slide
along any solid surface with no friction. An intelligent creature can control its movement by thought alone, skating,
turning, or stopping as desired. The subject’s base speed is its
normal speed + 15 feet. The subject can move up or down
inclines that he or she could otherwise walk on, but skating
upward reduces speed to normal, while skating downward
adds 30 feet (instead of 15) to the skater’s speed. An object
under the influence of the skate effect can be dragged across
the ground as if it weighed only one-tenth its normal
weight. This ability is usable three times per day. (When
using the Psionics Handbook, replace this ability with the skate
psionic power.)
Spell-Like Abilities: 2/day—stone shape; 1/day—move
earth, wall of stone. Caster level varies by age; save DC 10 +
dragon’s Charisma modifier + spell level.
Psionics (Sp): 1/day—teleport. Caster (or manifester)
level varies by age; save DC 10 + dragon’s Charisma modifier + spell (or power) level.
Attack/Defense Modes: id insinuation, ego whip/thought shield,
empty mind. A sapphire dragon manifests powers, and gains
additional attack and defense modes, as if it were a psion
with Psychoportation as its primary discipline.
Skills: A sapphire dragon has the Climb skill for free at 1
rank per Hit Die.
TOPAZ DRAGON
Dragon (Water)
Climate/Terrain: Inner Planes, any aquatic
Organization: Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile,
and young adult: solitary or clutch (2–5); adult, mature
adult, old, very old, ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1–2 plus 2–5 offspring)
Challenge Ratings: Wyrmling 3; very young 4; young 6;
juvenile 9; young adult 12; adult 14; mature adult 17; old
19; very old 20; ancient 22; wyrm 23; great wyrm 25
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: Wyrmling 8–9 HD (Small); very young
11–12 HD (Medium-size); young 14–15 HD (Mediumsize); juvenile 17–18 HD (Large); young adult 20–21
HD (Large); adult 23–24 HD (Huge); mature adult
26–27 HD (Huge); old 29–30 HD (Huge); very old
32–33 HD (Huge); ancient 35–36 HD (Gargantuan);
wyrm 38–39 HD (Gargantuan); great wyrm 41+ HD
(Colossal)
85
DRAGON
Sapphire Dragon Abilities by Age
Age Speed Initiative AC Special Abilities Caster Level
Wyrmling 40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), +1 16 (+2 size, +3 natural, +1 Dex), Electricity immunity, —
burrow 15 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 13, flat-footed 15 spider climb
Very young 40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), +1 18 (+1 size, +6 natural, +1 Dex), —
burrow 15 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 17
Young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +2 21 (+9 natural, +2 Dex), 1st
burrow 10 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 19
Juvenile 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +2 24 (+12 natural, +2 Dex), Sense psychoportation 3rd
burrow 10 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 22
Young adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +3 27 (–1 size, +15 natural, +3 Dex), DR 5/+1 5th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 24
Adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +3 30 (–1 size, +18 natural, +3 Dex), Skate, stone shape 7th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 27
Mature adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +4 32 (–2 size, +20 natural, +4 Dex), DR 10/+1 9th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 28
Old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +4 35 (–2 size, +23 natural, +4 Dex), Teleport 11th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 31
Very old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +5 39 (–2 size, +26 natural, +5 Dex), DR 15/+2 13th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 13, flat-footed 34
Ancient 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +5 42 (–2 size, +29 natural, +5 Dex), Wall of stone 15th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 13, flat-footed 37
Wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +6 44 (–4 size, +32 natural, +6 Dex), DR 20/+3 17th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 38
Great wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +6 47 (–4 size, +35 natural, +6 Dex), Move earth 19th
burrow 5 ft., swim 10 ft. touch 12, flat-footed 4186
Topaz dragons tend to be
unfriendly and selfish.
Though they are not
malevolent, their erratic
behavior makes any dealings with them unpleasant
and dangerous.
A topaz wyrmling’s scales
are dull yellow with
orange highlights. As it
ages, its color slowly brightens until its individual
scales become scarcely
visible. From a distance, the creature
looks as if it had been
sculpted from pure
topaz. A topaz dragon’s pupils fade as it
ages, so by the time it becomes a
great wyrm, its eyes resemble
glowing orbs of fire.
Topaz dragons spend
most of their time on
the Elemental Plane
of Water. During
their brief forays onto
the Material Plane,
they lair on secluded
beaches or caves below
the waterline. Even on
the Elemental Plane of
Water, however, topaz dragons
keep their lairs completely dry.
These dragons love
to lounge on outcroppings that are lashed by
waves and wind-blasted
DRAGON
Topaz Dragons by Age
Attack Fort Ref Will Breath Frightful
Age Size Hit Dice (hp) Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha Bonus Save Save Save Weapon (DC) Presence DC SR
Wyrmling S 7d12+7 (52) 13 10 13 14 15 14 +9 +6 +5 +7 2d8 (14) — —
Very young M 10d12+20 (85) 15 10 15 14 15 14 +12 +9 +7 +9 4d8 (17) — —
Young M 13d12+26 (110) 17 10 15 16 17 16 +16 +10 +8 +11 6d8 (18) — —
Juvenile L 16d12+ 48 (152) 19 10 17 18 19 18 +19 +13 +10 +14 8d8 (21) — —
Young adult L 19d12+76 (199) 23 10 19 18 19 18 +24 +15 +11 +15 10d8 (23) 23 20
Adult H 22d12+110 (253) 27 10 21 20 21 20 +28 +18 +13 +18 12d8 (26) 26 22
Mature adult H 25d12+125 (287) 29 10 21 20 21 20 +32 +19 +14 +19 14d8 (27) 27 24
Old H 28d12+168 (350) 31 10 23 22 23 22 +36 +22 +16 +22 16d8 (30) 30 26
Very old H 31d12+186 (387) 33 10 23 24 25 24 +40 +23 +17 +24 18d8 (31) 32 27
Ancient G 34d12+238 (459) 35 10 25 26 27 26 +42 +26 +19 +27 20d8 (34) 35 29
Wyrm G 37d12+333 (573) 39 10 29 28 29 28 +47 +29 +20 +29 22d8 (37) 37 30
Great wyrm C 40d12+400 (660) 43 10 31 30 31 30 +48 +32 +22 +32 24d8 (40) 40 32
Topaz Dragon Abilities by Age
Age Speed Initiative AC Special Abilities Caster Level
Wyrmling 40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), +0 17 (+1 size, +6 natural), Cold immunity, water breathing —
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 11, flat-footed 17
Very young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 19 (+9 natural), —
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 19
Young 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 22 (+12 natural), —
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 10, flat-footed 22
Juvenile 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 24 (–1 size, +15 natural), Feather fall 3rd
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 24
Young adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 27 (–1 size, +18 natural), DR 5/+1 5th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 9, flat-footed 27
Adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 29 (–2 size, +21 natural), Fog cloud 7th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 29
Mature adult 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 32 (–2 size, +24 natural), DR 10/+1 9th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 32
Old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 35 (–2 size, +27 natural), Control winds 11th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 35
Very old 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), +0 38 (–2 size, +30 natural), DR 15/+2 13th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 8, flat-footed 38
Ancient 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 39 (–4 size, +33 natural), Control weather 15th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 39
Wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 42 (–4 size, +36 natural), DR 20/+3 17th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 6, flat-footed 42
Great wyrm 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), +0 41 (–8 size, +39 natural), Shapechange 19th
burrow 5 ft., swim 60 ft. touch 2, flat-footed 41sea spray. Of course, such vantages also allow them to spot
passing prey, such as sharks and large squids.
Because they inhabit similar territories, topaz dragons
and bronze dragons often come into conflict. Duels between
the two are always furious and deadly.
Combat
Topaz dragons generally dislike intruders, but they prefer to
begin any potential confrontation with conversation. They
quickly attack intruders who prove either hostile or boring.
When outdoors, a topaz dragon prefers to express its displeasure first through its wind and weather control abilities,
then with physical attacks. Indoors, it usually leads off with
its breath weapon.
Breath Weapon (Su): A topaz dragon breathes a cone of
dehydration that looks like a watery blast. When directed
against an aqueous liquid (water or a liquid composed
mainly of water), this effect evaporates one cubic foot of
water per hit point of damage dealt. Each creature within
the cone takes the indicated damage, or half that amount
with a successful Reflex save.
Water Breathing (Ex): Topaz dragons breathe water as
readily as air.
Spell-Like Abilities: 3/day—control winds, fog cloud;
1/day—control weather. Caster level varies by age; save DC
10 + dragon’s Charisma modifier + spell level. (When
using the Psionics Handbook, replace control winds with the
control air psionic power.)
Psionics (Sp): 3/day—shapechange; 2/day—feather fall.
Caster (or manifester) level varies by age; save DC 10 + dragon’s
Charisma modifier + spell (or power) level.
Attack/Defense Modes: mind thrust, ego whip/thought shield,
mental barrier. A topaz dragon manifests powers, and gains
additional attack and defense modes, as if it were a psion
with Psychometabolism as its primary discipline.
Skills: A topaz dragon has the Swim skill for free at 1 rank
per Hit Die.
DREAD GUARD
Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 5d10 (27 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 20 ft. (can’t run)
AC: 17 (+6 masterwork banded mail, +1 masterwork small
steel shield), touch 10, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Longsword +6 melee
Damage: Longsword 1d8+3/19–20
Special Qualities: Cold resistance 10, construct
traits, fire resistance 10
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +1, Will +2
Abilities: Str 17, Dex 11, Con —, Int 6, Wis 13, Cha 2
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or company (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 6–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–15 HD (Large)
A dread guard appears to be an armored undead, still bearing the weapons and shield it carried in life. In fact, it is an
animated suit of armor, little different from a golem. Those
who create dread guards usually do so to obtain guardians
for their strongholds—guardians that can never be bribed
and rarely fooled.
A dread guard obeys simple commands from its creator,
but these are limited to one or two rudimentary concepts.
Typical orders include “Stay in this room and attack anyone
but me who enters,” and “Kill each person who opens this
chest until I tell you otherwise.”
A dread guard never speaks, but it understands commands in its creator’s language.
COMBAT
Dread guards attack mindlessly with their weapons. They
are unsubtle and straightforward in combat.
Construct Traits: A dread guard is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires
a Fortitude save unless it also works
on objects. The creature is
not subject to critical
hits, subdual damage,
ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or
death from massive damage. It cannot heal itself
but can be healed
through repair. It
cannot be raised or
resurrected. A dread
guard has darkvision
(60-foot range).
87
DREAD
GUARD
BS88
CONSTRUCTION
A dread guard may be constructed from any suit of masterwork heavy armor, and a Medium-size one may wield any
Medium-size or Large martial weapon. A Large dread guard
may wield any Large or Huge martial weapon.
The cost of creating a dread guard is 40,000 gp. This amount
includes the cost of a masterwork suit of heavy armor and,
if desired, a masterwork shield. Construction requires a
martial weapon, but it need not be a masterwork
weapon. Assembling the body requires a successful Craft (armorsmithing) check (DC 25).
The creator must be at least 15th level
and able to cast arcane spells. Completing
the ritual drains 800 XP from the creator and
requires the fabricate, geas/quest, and polymorph
any object spells.
DUNE STALKER
Medium-Size Outsider (Earth, Evil)
Hit Dice: 6d8+12 (39 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 40 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 17 (+7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Slam +9 melee
Damage: Slam 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Kiss of death, shout
Special Qualities: DR 10/+1, improved tracking, jump,
outsider traits, SR 20
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +7
Abilities: Str 16, Dex 10, Con 14, Int 13, Wis 15, Cha 11
Skills: Balance +6, Climb +19, Hide +6, Intimidate +4,
Jump +5, Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen +9, Move
Silently +9, Search +7, Spot +8, Tumble +9
Feats: Alertness, Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any desert and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 7–12 HD (Medium-size); 13–18 HD (Large)
Dune stalkers are creatures native to the Elemental Plane of
Earth, though they are also frequently found on the Gray
Waste of Hades. These monsters revel in evil and take their
only joy from spreading its blight. They despise the Material
Plane and avoid it as much as possible. Even so, they are
sometimes summoned there by evil characters to kill targets
or carry out other quests.
A dune stalker appears humanoid. It stands approximately
7 feet tall, but it would be taller if stretched out or forced to
stand erect. Its head is triangular, and the neck attaches near
the top of the head, causing its leering, toothy face and
pointed chin
to hang below its
shoulders. The dune stalker’s gangly body is hairless, and its
red, dusty, abrasive skin has no pores. The combination of
short legs, long arms, and stooped posture causes its hands to
drag on the ground. Its fingers and toes (four on each limb)
are long and bony. The creature has massive shoulders and an
enormous chest, which tapers to a narrow waist and hips.
A dune stalker that has been assigned a mission by its
summoner pursues the literal fulfillment of its instructions
to the exclusion of all else. It resents its time on the Material
Plane and wants to make its stay there as short as possible.
Occasionally, a summoner’s instructions are phrased in such
a way that the dune stalker cannot actually carry them out.
In this case, it is trapped on the Material Plane, where it
takes out its frustration by killing all creatures it finds.
Despite their sonic abilities, dune stalkers do not speak,
though they understand Common and Terran.
COMBAT
A dune stalker’s preferred tactic is to hide in a rocky area
and attack from ambush. When possible, it tries to gain
higher ground on its opponents by climbing up on a rock or a
structure to conceal itself.
It often begins an assault by using its shout ability to disorient a group of opponents, then leaping into combat to
deliver its kiss of death. Against foes within its reach, a dune
stalker usually prefers to deliver a kiss of death against just
one target rather than a shout against the whole group. The
DUNE
STALKERpreferred target is the one it seeks to slay, or the one that
presents the greatest danger, or the one that appears to have
the strongest good alignment. (Given the dune stalker’s
demented psychology, this last could be just about anyone,
but paladins usually stand out.)
Kiss of Death (Su): The kiss of death is a sonic and death
effect delivered with the dune stalker’s face pressed directly
against the victim’s. If the dune stalker makes a successful
melee touch attack (+9 melee), the opponent must attempt a
Fortitude saving throw (DC 15). Success leaves the opponent stunned for 1 round; failure sets up lethal vibrations in
the opponent’s body that result in instant death. This ability
is usable at will.
Shout (Sp): Three times per day, the dune stalker can
create an effect identical to that of a shout spell (caster level
6th; Fort save DC 14), except that the actual sound produced
resembles a loud, rasping cough.
Improved Tracking (Ex): A consummate tracker, the
dune stalker tracks as well as an invisible stalker does. Like
that creature, it uses Spot checks rather than Wilderness
Lore checks to follow its quarry’s trail.
Jump (Ex): A dune stalker can produce a jump effect
(caster level 6th) at will.
Outsider Traits: A dune stalker has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Skills: A dune stalker gains a +4 racial bonus on Intimidate checks.
EFFIGY
Medium-Size Undead (Fire, Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 27d12 (175 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 20 (+2 Dex, +3 deflection, +5 natural), touch 15, flatfooted 18
Attacks: 2 incorporeal touches +16 melee touch
Damage: Incorporeal touch 1d6/19–20 plus 2d6 fire plus
energy drain plus infuse
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./ 5 ft.
Special Attacks: Energy drain, infuse
Special Qualities: Fire subtytpe, incorporeal subtype,
SR 28, undead traits
Saves: Fort +11 Ref +13, Will +20
Abilities: Str —, Dex 15, Con —, Int 16, Wis 17, Cha 17
Skills: Balance +4, Escape Artist +17, Hide +17, Jump
+2, Listen +20, Search +23, Spot +25, Tumble +17
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Expertise, Great Fortitude,
Improved Critical (incorporeal touch), Improved
Initiative, Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes, Run, Weapon
Focus (incorporeal touch)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or brood (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 17
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 28–54 HD (Medium-size)
An effigy is an envious undead that hates living creatures
and lusts after the life energy they possess. It seeks to possess
a living creature and take over its life, but it cannot maintain
its usurped body for long. Eventually the fires of its own raw
hatred literally immolate the body it has possessed.
An effigy appears as a translucent humanoid shape composed of multicolored flame. Its eyes glow white within the
flickering fires of its insubstantial body, but it has no other
discernible facial features.
COMBAT
An effigy seeks to join its undead force with the body of a
living host, which it then burns out from within. It need not
be joined with a body to attack, but it often keeps its most
recent body’s ashes animated within its fiery heart.
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature struck by an
effigy’s incorporeal touch attack must succeed at a Fortitude
saving throw (DC 26) or gain two negative levels. For each
negative level bestowed, the effigy heals 5 points of damage.
If the amount of healing is more than the damage the creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit points. If
the negative level has not been
removed (with a spell such as
restoration) before 24
hours have passed,
the afflicted opponent must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
26) to remove it.
89
EFFIGY
VR90
Failure means the opponent’s level (or Hit Dice) is reduced
by one.
Infuse (Su): When an effigy hits a humanoid or monstrous humanoid that is no more than two size categories
larger than itself with its incorporeal touch attack, the
opponent must make a successful Will save (DC 26) or
become infused with the effigy’s spirit. The effects of infusion on the opponent are similar to those of a magic jar spell,
except as noted here. Upon infusion, the effigy gains control of the infused creature. While infused, it uses the
body’s physical ability scores but its own mental ability
scores. It also uses whatever attack forms the subject has
available. Such attacks still do 2d6 points of additional fire
damage, but they do not bestow negative levels.
An infused effigy automatically deals fire damage and
inflicts energy drain on its host body each round. The subject dies upon reaching –10 hit points or dropping below 1st
level. At that point, the body becomes a flaming corpse.
Each round after infusion occurs, the subject must
make an opposed Wisdom check against the effigy. Success casts the effigy out, forcing it to retreat 30 feet. Thereafter, it may not attempt to infuse the same target again
for 1 round per point of difference between the check
results. A failed save leaves the effigy in control of the
body. If an effigy is turned while infused in a host, it abandons the body to flee.
Fire Subtype (Ex): An effigy is immune to fire damage
but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for
half damage is allowed. In that case, it takes half damage on
a success and double damage on a failure.
Incorporeal Subtype: An effigy can be harmed only by
other incorporeal creatures, +1 or better magic weapons,
spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. The
creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal source, except for force effects or attacks made with
ghost touch weapons. An effigy can pass through solid
objects, but not force effects, at will. Its attacks ignore natural armor, armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and
force effects work normally against them. An effigy always
moves silently and cannot be heard with Listen checks if it
doesn’t wish to be.
Undead Traits: An effigy is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects,
necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a Fortitude
save unless it also works on objects. It is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability drain,
energy drain, or death from massive damage. An effigy
cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is willing.
The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
ELEMENTAL WEIRD
Weirds are cryptic beings of elemental force who are powerful in the art of divination. They are oracles, soothsayers, and
seers of knowledge past, present, and future. Each weird is
composed of material from one of the four elements (air,
earth, fire, or water) and has special knowledge of the particular aspect of fate with which its element is associated
(see below). These creatures dwell in remote or hidden locations on the Material Plane—a fact that makes travel difficult for those seeking their counsel.
The upper body of a weird always resembles that of a
beautiful female humanoid. The lower half may be either
humanoid or a serpentine column. A weird rises from a pool
of the appropriate element, which it can never leave.
A weird can divine information that could change the very
course of history. It has its finger on the pulse of fate and
knows exactly where possible courses of action might lead.
Like most seers, an elemental weird never provides a clear,
concise prophecy. Some of the message may seem forthright,
but some is always confusing or just difficult to decipher
because the listener does not have enough information to
understand the weird’s meaning. Though its messages can be
misinterpreted, a weird’s warnings and advice are never
wrong. Its counsel is seldom free, however, so anyone
beseeching a weird had best bring offerings or be prepared to
undertake a quest of vital importance to the creature.
A weird can communicate with any creature that has a
language.
COMBAT
Elemental weirds do not fight if they can avoid it. If they
must fight, they begin by summoning elementals to defend
them. If any other elementals are present (regardless of
type), the weird attempts to gain control of them and turn
them against its foes. Meanwhile, the weird remains in the
center of its pool, using divination magic to foresee possible
consequences of the battle and acting accordingly.
If forced into melee, a weird uses its reach to lash out at
nearby foes. If seriously threatened, a weird retreats back to
its plane of origin.
Elemental Command (Su): A weird can attempt to
gain control over any elemental within 100 feet regardless
of the latter’s elemental type. The elemental must make a
successful Will save (DC 23) or succumb to the weird’s
control. An elemental that saves against this attack is
immune to that weird’s elemental command ability for 24
hours. There is no limit to the number of elementals that a
weird can control.
Once under the weird’s control, an elemental serves the
weird until either it or the weird dies, until the weird dismisses it, or until the duration for its summoning expires.
It obeys the weird explicitly, even if ordered to attack the
being who originally summoned it. The weird does not
need to concentrate to maintain control over any elemental it commands.
ELEMENTAL
WEIRDElemental Pool (Su): Each weird dwells within a large
pool (at least 20 feet across and 40 feet deep) filled with the
purest form of its element. The pool is always secured to a
flat surface (floor, wall, or ceiling; see individual entries for
possible orientations) such that its depth forms a hollow
within that surface. The surface must have sufficient depth
91
ELEMENTAL
WEIRD
Air Weird Earth Weird
Large Elemental (Air) Large Elemental (Earth)
Hit Dice: 15d8+45 (112 hp) 15d8+45 (112 hp)
Initiative: +6 +6
Speed: 30 ft., fly 60 ft. (perfect) 30 ft., burrow 30 ft.
AC: 15 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), 15 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 13 touch 11, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Slam +15/+10/+5 melee Slam +15/+10/+5 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+7 Slam 2d6+7
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Elemental command, spells Elemental command, spells
Special Qualities: Air mastery, air pool, breathsense, DR 20/+2, DR 20/+2, earth mastery, earth pool, elemental
elemental traits, prescience, regeneration 10, traits, prescience, regeneration 10, SR 25,
SR 25 tremorsense
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +13, Will +11 Fort +14, Ref +9, Will +11
Abilities: Str 21, Dex 14, Con 17, Int 20, Wis 23, Cha 22 Str 21, Dex 14, Con 17, Int 20, Wis 23, Cha 22
Skills: Concentration +10, Diplomacy +17, Intimidate Concentration +10, Diplomacy +17, Intimidate
+15, Knowledge (any three) +12, Listen +8, Scry +15, Knowledge (any three) +12, Listen +8, Scry
+14, Sense Motive +13, Spot +8 +14, Sense Motive +13, Spot +8
Feats: Alertness, Dodge, Empower Spell, Flyby Attack Alertness, Dodge, Empower Spell, Great
(B), Great Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Lightning
Lightning Reflexes, Maximize Spell Reflexes, Maximize Spell
Fire Weird Water Weird
Large Elemental (Fire) Large Elemental (Water)
Hit Dice: 15d8+45 (112 hp) 15d8+45 (112 hp)
Initiative: +6 +6
Speed: 30 ft., fly 60 ft. (perfect) 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
AC: 15 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), 15 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 13 touch 11, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Slam +15/+10/+5 melee Slam +15/+10/+5 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+7 plus 2d6 fire Slam 2d6+7
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Burn, elemental command, spells Drench, elemental command, spells
Special Qualities: DR 20/+2, elemental traits, fire pool, fire DR 20/+2, elemental traits, prescience,
subtype, prescience, regeneration 10, SR 25 regeneration 10, SR 25, water mastery, water pool
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +13, Will +11 Fort +14, Ref +9, Will +11
Abilities: Str 21, Dex 14, Con 17, Int 20, Wis 23, Cha 22 Str 21, Dex 14, Con 17, Int 20, Wis 23, Cha 22
Skills: Concentration +10, Diplomacy +17, Intimidate Concentration +10, Diplomacy +17, Intimidate
+15, Knowledge (any three) +12, Listen +8, Scry +15, Knowledge (any three) +12, Listen +8, Scry
+14, Sense Motive +13, Spot +8 +14, Sense Motive +13, Spot +8, Swim +13
Feats: Alertness, Dodge, Empower Spell, Great Alertness, Dodge, Empower Spell, Great
Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Lightning Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Lightning
Reflexes, Maximize Spell Reflexes, Maximize Spell
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground, or appropriate element
Organization: Solitary, pair, or charm (3–4)
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 16–30 HD (Large); 31–45 HD (Huge)92
to accommodate the pool. An elemental pool can also exist
as a separate area inside a larger volume of the same element; for example, a water weird’s pool might be situated at
the bottom of an ocean or lake.
The base of the pool contains a portal to the weird’s native
plane. Three times per day, the weird can summon forth 2d4
huge elementals, 1d2 greater elementals, or 1 elder elemental through this portal. Any nonelemental creature entering
a pool without the weird’s permission must succeed at a
Fortitude save (DC 20) each round or be irrevocably transformed into the elemental material of the pool. Creatures
granted access to the pool by the weird are not subject to
transformation. However, creatures allowed to
enter a pool must still provide their own protection
from the elemental material, as well as the means
to breathe and move within that enviroment. Otherwise, they suffer the effects given in the individual entry.
A weird is physically tied to
its pool and cannot leave except
to return to its native plane
through the portal. A weird
may rise up to a height of
10 feet above the surface
of its pool, but the lower
part of its body must always
remain in contact with the
elemental material. Once a
weird exits the pool for its native
plane, the portal closes, and the
pool loses its special effects.
Elemental Traits (Ex): An elemental weird is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not
subject to critical hits or flanking, and
it cannot be raised or resurrected.
The creature also has darkvision
(60-foot range).
Prescience (Su): At will and as
a free action, a weird can duplicate the
effect of any of the following divination
spells: analyze dweomer, clairaudience/clairvoyance, contact other
plane, detect thoughts, discern location, find the path, foresight,
greater scrying, legend lore, locate creature, locate object, tongues,
true seeing, vision. Caster level 18th; save DC 16 + spell level.
AIR WEIRD
Air weirds are elemental spirits that offer direction and
guidance to those traveling into unknown areas. They can
point out paths not considered, reveal unknown doors into
new worlds, and describe what may be needed to survive
such journeys. An air weird’s pool is often found outside, in
an open-air place such as a windy plain or on a mountaintop.
An air weird appears as a ghostly, translucent woman
composed of flowing vapors. Its eyes are deep blue, and its
hair appears windblown. The lower half of the creature’s
body is a tendril of mist that trails back into its pool.
Spells: An air weird can cast arcane spells and divine
spells from the Air and Travel domains as an 18th-level sorcerer (spells known 9/5/5/4/4/4/3/3/2/1; spells/day
6/8/8/7/7/7/7/6/5/3; save DC 16 + spell level).
Air Mastery (Ex): An air weird gains a +1 bonus on
attack and damage rolls if its foe is airborne.
Air Pool: An air weird’s pool is filled with billowing, gusting vapors of breathable air and mist. Creatures without
the ability to fly cannot move through it,
except by falling. An air weird’s pool may
be affixed to any vertical or horizontal surface, and it may be right side up or upside
down (if affixed to a ceiling, for example).
Breathsense (Ex): An air weird can automatically sense the location of any
breathing creature within 60 feet.
EARTH WEIRD
Earth weirds are foretellers of death and
doom. They can pronounce an individual’s
impending fate or warn of a coming apocalypse.
They are also prognosticators
of wealth and fortune, foreseeing who shall succeed or
fail in the pursuit of material possessions. An earth weird’s pool is often situated at the
base of a mountain or deep underground.
An earth weird’s upper body resembles that of a
beautiful human woman. The creature has sparkling
gemstones for eyes and hair the brown color of
earth, streaked with veins of gold and silver. The
lower body is a shifting column of stone and dirt
that connects to the earth pool.
Spells: An earth weird can cast
arcane spells and divine
spells from the Earth and
Destruction domains as an
18th-level sorcerer (spells known
9/5/5/4/4/4/3/3/2/1; spells/day 6/8/8/7/7/7/7/6/5/3;
save DC 16 + spell level).
Earth Mastery (Ex): An earth weird gains a +1 bonus on
attack and damage rolls if its foe is touching the ground.
Earth Pool: This pool is filled with churning mud, rocks,
and earth. Every creature within it (except the earth weird)
takes 4d8 points of damage per round from the ever-grinding
earth. In addition, creatures entering the pool suffocate if
they do not have a way to breathe and are entombed (unable
to move) if they cannot burrow. An earth weird’s pool may be
affixed only to a horizontal surface, and it may appear only in
a right side up position (such as in the floor of a cavern).
Tremorsense (Ex): An earth weird can automatically
sense the location of anything within 60 feet that is in contact with the ground.
ELEMENTAL
WEIRD
JJFIRE WEIRD
Fire weirds are the diviners of hope. They shed light when
all is dark and illuminate lore that has been long lost and
nearly forgotten. They guide the long-suffering and ignorant to new peace and prosperity.
The beautiful, feminine half of a fire weird is a humanoid
form composed of flickering flames and wreathed with
smoke. The lower half of the body snakes away in a fiery trail
into the hazy, flame-filled pool.
Burn (Ex): Any creature that is hit by the fire weird’s slam
attack (or that hits the
fire weird with a natural
weapon or an unarmed
attack) must succeed at a
Reflex save (DC 20) or
catch fire (see Catching
on Fire in Chapter 3 of
the DUNGEON MASTER’S
Guide). The fire burns for
1d4 rounds.
Spells: A fire weird
can cast arcane spells and
divine spells from the
Fire and Sun domains as
an 18th-level sorcerer
(spells known 9/5/5/4/
4/4/3/3/2/1; spells/day
6/8/8/7/7/7/7/6/5/3;
save DC 16 + spell level).
Fire Pool: This pool
contains a torrent of
dancing flames that burn
and smoke continually.
Unprotected flammable
materials within a fire
pool catch on fire immediately, and any creature
within the pool takes
3d10 points of fire damage per round. Creatures
without the ability to fly
cannot move through this pool, except by falling. A fire
weird’s pool may be affixed to any vertical or horizontal surface, and it may appear only in a right side up position (such
as on the floor of a cavern).
Fire Subtype (Ex): A fire weird is immune to fire
damage but takes double damage from cold unless a
saving throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the
creature takes half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
WATER WEIRD
Water weirds are soothsayers that bring words of healing
to the wounded. They offer curative knowledge for suffering lands and new options for people who seek a
better way. When there is little hope for life, water weirds
offer a way to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat against
all odds.
A water weird appears as a translucent, blue humanoid
woman composed entirely of water. Its feet remain below
the surface of its pool at all times.
Drench (Ex): A water weird’s touch puts out torches,
campfires, and other open flames of its own size category or
smaller, as long as they are nonmagical.
Spells: A water weird can cast arcane spells and divine
spells from the Water and
Healing domains as an
18th-level sorcerer (spells
known 9/5/5/4/4/4/3/3/
2/1; spells/day 6/8/8/7/
7/7/7/6/5/3; save DC 16
+ spell level).
Water Mastery (Ex): A
water weird gains a +1
bonus on attack and damage rolls if its opponent is
touching water.
Water Pool: This pool
is filled with bubbling,
swirling water. Any creature within it that cannot
breathe water immediately
begins to drown (see The
Drowning Rule in Chapter
3 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s
Guide). Any creature without the ability to swim cannot move through a water
pool, except by falling. A
water weird’s pool may be
affixed only to a horizontal
surface, and it may appear
only in a right side up position (such as on the floor
of a cavern).
WEIRD SOCIETY
All weirds, regardless of their elemental subtypes, are connected to each other in fundamental ways. They share a
unique, secret bond that is evidenced in their level of cooperation. A weird that cannot provide the desired knowledge
to a supplicant usually guides him or her to another weird
for better counsel. Weirds of different elements often place
their pools close to one another to broaden the range of divination services available to supplicants in an area.
Weirds are strongly linked to the Material Plane. They
have all chosen to leave their native planes and serve as
diviners for the humanoid races. Though they are bound to
their pools, weirds can interact with other races though
mortal agents that specialize in divination magic.
93
ELEMENTAL
WEIRD94
ETHER SCARAB
Tiny Outsider
Hit Dice: 1d8 (4 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: 10 ft.
AC: 14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), touch 14, flat-footed 12
Attacks: Bite +2 melee
Damage: Bite 1d3–1
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Wounding
Special Qualities: Death burst, outsider traits, planar rip
Saves: Fort+2, Ref +4, Will +1
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 1, Wis 9, Cha 4
Skills: Hide +11, Listen +0, Spot +0
Feats: Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, cluster (3–5), or swarm (6–11)
Challenge Rating: 1
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 2–3 HD (Small)
These panicky, harmless-looking beetles are native to the
Ethereal Plane. A wide variety of ethereal predators eat ether
scarabs, so the latter have developed the ability to flee across
planar boundaries. They often appear on the Material Plane
next to buildings or other large objects near which they
have made their lairs on the Ethereal Plane.
An ether scarab has six tentaclelike legs and a hard,
amethyst-veined, chitinous shell marked by
swirling, colorful patterns. It sports
two pairs of
vicious-looking mandibles, which it uses to tear through
planar boundaries.
COMBAT
The timid ether scarab almost always runs from trouble. If
forced into battle, it bites with its mandibles. Ether scarabs
do not enjoy the gravity of the Material Plane, so they return
to their home plane as soon as it is safe to do so.
Wounding (Ex): A wound resulting from an ether scarab’s
bite attack bleeds for an additional 1 point of damage per
round thereafter. Multiple wounds from such attacks result in
cumulative bleeding loss (two wounds for 2 points of damage
per round, and so on). The bleeding can be stopped only by a
successful Heal check (DC 10) or the application of a cure spell
or some other healing spell (heal, healing circle, or the like).
Death Burst (Ex): An ether scarab that dies on the Material Plane explodes harmlessly, causing a planar rip (see above)
between the Material Plane and the Ethereal Plane. This hole
in the planar fabric lasts 1d4+1 rounds.
Outsider Traits: An ether scarab has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Planar Rip (Su): By ripping at the planar fabric with its
mandibles, an ether scarab can create a two-way portal
between its own plane and another (usually the Material).
This hole between the planes appears tiny, but it can accommodate any Large or smaller creature traveling in either
direction. A planar rip closes in 1d4+1 rounds.
ETHEREAL
DOPPELGANGER
Medium-Size Shapechanger
Hit Dice: 20d8 (90 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 14 (+1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 2 claws +16 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4–1
Special Attacks: Assume identity, brain lock,
mind wipe
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 25/+3, fast
healing 8, plane shift, SR 20
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +13, Will +13
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 15
Skills: Bluff +12, Diplomacy +6, Disguise +25,
Intimidate +4, Listen +3, Sense Motive +11, Spot +7
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Dodge, Expertise,
Improved Initiative, Mobility, Weapon Finesse (claw)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary or squad (1 plus 4–16 jann)
Challenge Rating: 15
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil
Advancement: By character class
ETHER
SCARAB
DREthereal doppelgangers live on the Ethereal Plane, in
buildings that serve as combination showrooms, vaults,
prisons, and shops. Ethereal doppelgangers are fond of
magic items, and they frequently visit the Material Plane
to acquire new ones for their collections. During their
stays there, they usually disguise themselves as members
of some other race. An ethereal doppelganger often interacts with or joins an adventuring party that it believes can
lead it to, or near, a magic item it desires.
In its natural form, an ethereal doppelganger appears as a
gangly humanoid with slick skin and white eyes that have
no pupils. While traveling on the Material Plane, it usually
takes the form of an attractive member of the same race as
the group it has joined.
An ethereal doppelganger speaks Common, Infernal,
and at least one elemental language (Auran, Aquan, Ignan,
or Terran).
COMBAT
When it plans an extended stay on the
Material Plane, an ethereal doppelganger uses its brain lock ability to
render a chosen subject helpless,
then takes that creature back to its
floating home on the Ethereal Plane.
In its sanctum, the doppelganger
makes the subject comfortable and
offers a deal. If the subject allows the
doppelganger to assume his or her
identity and acquire the desired item,
the doppelganger will ensure the subject’s comfort in the interim and
return him or her unharmed to any
desired location on the Material
Plane afterward. If the subject
refuses, the doppelganger wipes
any memory of itself from the
subject’s mind, returns the creature to the Material Plane, and
tries again with a new subject.
Should the subject agree to the deal
and then attempt to escape, the doppelganger sells him or her into extraplanar slavery. But if the
subject accepts the agreement and complies with its terms,
the doppelganger is as good as its word.
Assume Identity (Su): An ethereal doppelganger can
absorb another creature’s mind, memories, and personality. This process requires 1 hour of unbroken physical contact per level or Hit Die of the subject. The target may
attempt a Will save (DC 22); if that is successful, the
process is negated and the ethereal doppelganger must
begin again. A willing creature can choose to waive the
saving throw.
After consuming the target creature’s identity, the ethereal doppelganger can assume its form with 100% accuracy.
The doppelganger possesses the other creature’s memories,
plus its alignment and all of its abilities, except for cleric
spells of 2nd level or higher, a paladin’s special abilities, and
other powers granted by deities. (This does not deprive the
subject of those memories or abilities; it only duplicates
them in the ethereal doppelganger.) The doppelganger
retains its own damage resistance, darkvision, fast healing,
and spell resistance in its new form.
If an ethereal doppelganger commits an act that runs
counter to its new identity’s alignment, it is immediately
forced back into its natural form for 1d10 rounds. It still
retains the basic memories of the assumed identity, though
not the deeper memories. If the subject dies before the contract is complete, the ethereal doppelganger immediately
reverts to its natural form and loses all of that subject’s memories and abilities.
Brain Lock (Su): As a standard
action, an ethereal doppelganger
can lock away the higher mind of an
opponent up to 300 feet away, provided both are on the same plane
and the doppelganger has line of
sight to its subject. A successful
Will save (DC 22) negates the
attempt; failure leaves the subject
mentally paralyzed. A brain-locked
creature is not stunned, so attackers get no special advantage against
it. Furthermore, it can still defend
itself against attacks (its Dexterity
bonus to AC, if any, still applies), but it
cannot move or initiate any actions. A
brain lock can negate various forms of
special movement and cause harm to
the creature thereby. For example, a
brain-locked flying creature falls
because it cannot flap its wings,
and a brain-locked swimming creature may drown because it can no
longer move its limbs. The effect
lasts 20 rounds, but it can be dismissed earlier.
Mind Wipe (Su): With any successful melee touch
attack, an ethereal doppelganger can wipe all memory of its
existence from an opponent’s mind (no saving throw).
Fast Healing (Ex): An ethereal doppelganger regains lost
hit points at the rate of 3 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the ethereal doppelganger to regrow or
reattach lost body parts.
Plane Shift (Sp): An ethereal doppelganger can use plane
shift (caster level 20th; Will save DC 17) at will.
95
ETHEREAL
DOPPELGANGER96
ETHEREAL SLAYER
Medium-Size Outsider (Chaotic, Evil)
Hit Dice: 16d8+32 (104 hp)
Initiative: +8
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 24 (+4 Dex, +10 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 20
Attacks: 2 claws +18 melee and bite +15 melee
Damage: Claw 1d8+1, bite 1d6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Qualities: Detect magic, dimensional anchor, DR
20/+2, outsider traits, plane shift, SR 23
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +14, Will +13
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 19, Con 14, Int 5, Wis 16, Cha 9
Skills: Hide +20, Jump +17, Listen +21, Move Silently +20,
Spot +21
Feats: Alertness, Dodge, Improved Initiative, Weapon
Finesse (bite), Weapon Focus (claw)
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 17–24 HD (Medium-size); 25–32 HD
(Large); 33–40 HD (Huge); 41–48 HD (Gargantuan)
Ethereal slayers are carnivorous predators that lie in
ambush on the Ethereal Plane, waiting for unwitting creatures to enter. They typically
wait in spots
that have significant cross-planar traffic, such as beside
Material Plane buildings that are rich in magical auras. If
several attempts have already been made to access a particular Material Plane location via ethereal travel, there is
a good chance that a slayer has taken notice and gravitated
to that spot.
A spiny, chitinous shell armors an ethereal slayer’s body,
and four mandibles surround its drooling mouth. It has
two thick, birdlike legs and two arms that end in wicked,
four-foot claws, like those of a praying mantis.
COMBAT
Ethereal slayers are ambush predators. They use their detect
magic ability to locate strong magical auras, then wait near
them for creatures to travel past on the Ethereal Plane.
When a creature appears nearby, the slayer uses its dimensional anchor ability to fix its prey on the Ethereal Plane,
then attacks with its claws. Should its opponent manage to
flee to the Material Plane, the slayer uses its plane shift ability to pursue.
Detect Magic (Su): An ethereal slayer can produce a
detect magic effect (caster level 9th) at will.
Dimensional Anchor (Su): An ethereal slayer can produce a dimensional anchor effect (caster level 9th) at will.
Outsider Traits: An ethereal slayer has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Plane Shift (Su): Twice per day, an ethereal slayer can
produce a plane shift effect (caster level 9th; self only; save
DC 14).
FAMINE SPIRIT
Medium-Size Undead
Hit Dice: 32d12 (208 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 60 ft.
AC: 18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Bite +19 melee and 2 claws +17 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+3/19–20/vorpal bite, claw 1d6+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Aura of pain, vorpal bite
Special Qualities: Create spawn, ethereal jaunt, fast healing 10, scent, see invisibility, undead traits
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +10, Will +20
Abilities: Str 16, Dex 11, Con —, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 15
Skills: Listen +37, Search +36, Spot +37
Feats: Cleave, Expertise, Great Cleave, Improved Bull
Rush, Improved Critical (bite), Improved Initiative,
Improved Trip, Multiattack, Power Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, brood (3–5), or band (2–5
plus 2–8 ghasts and 4–16 ghouls)
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None
ETHEREAL
SLAYERAlignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 33–64 HD (Medium-size)
The famine spirit, also called a ravenous ghoul, is a corporeal undead motivated entirely by hunger. It seeks to consume in death all that it was denied in life. It eats everything and anything that a living being could, but its
hunger is never sated. A famine spirit can consume the
comestibles of a Mordenkainen’s magnificent mansion
(caster level 14th) in a mere 5 hours and still be hungry
for more. In a day, it can consume as many as one hundred humans.
A famine spirit appears as an obscenely obese humanoid or monstrous humanoid with a mouth full of
razor-sharp teeth. Should the need present itself, a
famine spirit can unhinge its jaw to swallow objects
too large for it to consume normally.
Undead are among the few creatures that a famine
spirit does not eat, so it may attract groups of ghouls and
ghasts that serve it and feast in its wake.
COMBAT
Famine spirits ignore most other living things, turning on
them only if they get in the way of its feasting, or if there
is nothing else to consume. It fights primarily with its
jaws, attempting to bite off the heads of any opponents.
Aura of Pain (Su): The famine spirit radiates a continual
symbol of pain effect (save DC 28) as a 60-foot-radius emanation. A creature that fails its save is affected while within
the area and for 10 minutes after leaving it. A successful
save makes a creature immune to that famine spirit’s aura of
pain for 24 hours.
Vorpal Bite (Ex): The bite of a famine spirit severs the
head of a Large or smaller opponent on a critical hit.
Create Spawn (Su): A famine spirit rarely leaves corpses
in its wake, but sometimes it is forced to flee and leave slain
opponents behind. Each of these corpses rises in 1d3 days as
a famine spirit, unless a protection from evil spell is cast upon
it before that time.
Ethereal Jaunt (Su): Three times per day, a famine spirit
can produce an ethereal jaunt effect (caster level 20th). It uses
this ability primarily to enter storehouses or to deal with
ethereal interlopers.
See Invisibility (Su): A famine spirit can see invisible
objects and beings as if under the effect of a see invisibility
spell. This ability is always active.
Undead Traits: A famine spirit is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. A famine spirit cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision (60-
foot range).
FELLDRAKE
The small, wingless dragons known as felldrakes trace their
origin to Bahamut the Platinum Dragon. After helping a
group of powerful elf wizards turn back a demonic invasion,
Bahamut created the felldrakes to guard the elves against future incursions. All felldrakes have the blood of Bahamut in
their veins and are fierce, loyal, and good at heart.
Felldrakes speak Draconic and Sylvan.
COMBAT
Felldrakes are impulsive attackers. Aggressive and eager to
fight, they seek to close with opponents immediately.
Dragon Traits: Felldrakes are immune to sleep and paralysis effects. They have darkvision (60-foot range) and lowlight vision.
CRESTED FELLDRAKE
Elves often employ crested felldrakes as guards for settlements and in border patrols.
A crested felldrake looks like a small, wingless dragon
with powerful hind legs and a bright crest on its head.
Combat
When crested felldrakes fight in a group, some charge into
battle and try to pin down the enemy, while their comrades
move to encircle the foe.
97
FELLDRAKE98
SPITTING FELLDRAKE
Because of its snaky body, a spitting felldrake can squeeze
through small spaces. Thus, it is ideal for the underground
expeditions so contrary to elven nature.
The spitting felldrake is slightly
larger than its crested cousin. Its
body is long and sinuous, like
that of a snake.
Combat
A spitting felldrake usually
pauses to spit acid before
closing to melee. It can spit
acid up to 30 feet as a
ranged touch attack with
no range increment.
HORNED FELLDRAKE
Horned felldrakes are often
used to protect important individuals or cities.
This creature is larger than
the other felldrakes. Its head
sports several horns, which it uses to
impale foes.
Combat
Horned felldrakes usually charge foes first, then use their
horns in melee.
FELLDRAKE
Crested Felldrake Spitting Felldrake Horned Felldrake
Small Dragon Medium-Size Dragon Medium-Size Dragon
Hit Dice: 2d12+4 (17 hp) 3d12+3 (22 hp) 4d12+8 (34 hp)
Initiative: +0 +2 +0
Speed: 40 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
AC: 15 (+1 size, +4 natural), 16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), 17 (+7 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 15 touch 12, flat-footed 14 touch 10, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Bite +3 melee Bite +6 melee, or spit +5 Horn +8 melee
ranged touch
Damage: Bite 1d8 Bite 1d6+3, spit 2d4 acid Horn 2d6+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./ 5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — — Charge 4d6+6
Special Qualities: Dragon traits, scent Dragon traits Dragon traits
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +3, Will +4 Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +3 Fort +6, Ref +4, Will +5
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 10, Con 15, Str 14, Dex 15, Con 13, Str 17, Dex 10, Con 15,
Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 9 Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 9 Int 5, Wis 12, Cha 8
Skills: Hide +6, Jump +2, Listen +5, Hide +7, Jump +4, Listen +4, Hide +3, Jump +6, Listen +6,
Spot +5 Spot +4 Spot +6
Feats: Alertness Weapon Focus (bite) Alertness, Weapon Focus (horn)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Temperate plains, forest, hills Any land and underground
and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), or Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), or
pack (4–16) pack (4–16)
Challenge Rating: 1 2 3
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral good Always neutral good Always neutral good
Advancement: 3–4 HD (Small); 4–9 HD (Medium-size) 5–8 HD (Medium-size);
5–6 HD (Medium-size) 9–12 HD (Large)Charge (Ex): A horned felldrake typically begins a battle
by charging at its opponent. In addition to the normal benefits and hazards of a charge, this allows the horned felldrake
to make a single horn attack (+8 melee) that deals 4d6+6
points of damage.
FIENDWURM
Gargantuan Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 24d10+216 (348 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 60 ft., burrow 60 ft.
AC: 27 (–4 size, +1 Dex, +20 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 26
Attacks: Bite +33 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+19
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks:
Death rift,
demonic belch,
improved grab,
swallow whole
Special Qualities:
Acidic hide, acid
immunity, darkvision
60 ft., DR 15/–, low-light
vision, portal, tremorsense
Saves: Fort +23, Ref +15,
Will +10
Abilities: Str 36,
Dex 13, Con 29,
Int 7, Wis 14, Cha 8
Skills: Intuit Direction
+9, Listen +11, Spot +12
Feats: Alertness, Dodge,
Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any desert, plains, and underground
Organization: Solitary or troupe (1 plus 2–8 dretches,
quasits, or vrocks)
Challenge Rating: 28
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 25–72 HD (Colossal)
A fiendwurm is the result of demonic magic applied to an
ordinary earthworm. This tormented monster is constantly
wracked with unbearable pain from the planar portal embedded in its belly. Eating relieves the creature’s pain for a short
while, so it attempts to swallow any creature it encounters.
Its tortured existence keeps it constantly on the hunt.
A fiendwurm is a 40-foot-long, serpentine creature with a
mottled gray and pink hide. Its huge maw is filled with long,
snakelike fangs. The creature is never at rest; its intense pain
causes it to writhe and squirm constantly.
Fiendwurms are in such terrible agony that they are
unable to communicate at all.
COMBAT
A fiendwurm immediately lunges to bite and swallow any
living creature it chances upon. If it seems to be overmatched,
it uses its demonic belch ability to summon aid. A fiendwurm does not stop attacking until it is slain.
Death Rift (Su): Upon its death, a fiendwurm’s portal
implodes. Every creature within 5 feet of the fiendwurm
that fails a Reflex save (DC 31) is drawn into the collapsing
portal and transported to the Abyss. The implosion destroys
the fiendwurm’s body along with the portal. Thus, any creatures transported to the Abyss via a death rift must find
another means of returning to their original planes.
Demonic Belch (Su): Three times per day, a fiendwurm
can use its connection with the Abyss to bring 1d4 demons
to its aid. It expels these creatures from its mouth
with a great belching
sound. The demons arrive
unharmed, but the fiendwurm’s
pain may cause it to attack
them thereafter, if they
seem to be easier prey than
the opponents, or if there
are no other creatures
left to eat. Roll d%
to determine the
kind of demons
that arrive: 01–50
jovocs, 51–75 quasits,
76–100 vrocks. These
demons cannot use
their summoning abilities for one hour after being snatched out of the
Abyss. Once a fiendwurm uses this ability, it must wait 1d4
rounds before using it again.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a fiendwurm hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a bite
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple
as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +49). If it gets a hold, it can try to swallow
the opponent in the next round. Alternatively, the fiendwurm has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or
simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the fiendwurm is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A fiendwurm can swallow a
grabbed opponent that is at least two size categories smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple
bonus +49). Once inside the fiendwurm, the opponent takes
2d8+13 points of bludgeoning damage and 1d8 points of acid
damage per round from the creature’s gizzard. A successful
99
FIENDWURM100
grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of
the gizzard and return to the fiendwurm’s mouth, where
another successful grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with
either claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing
at least 25 points of damage to the gizzard (AC 20) in this way
creates an opening large enough to permit escape. Once a
single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the
hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own
way out. A Gargantuan fiendwurm’s gizzard can hold 2 Huge,
8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128 Small or smaller creatures.
Acidic Hide (Ex): A fiendwurm produces a highly
caustic mucus that coats its entire body. Touching its hide
deals 3d6 points of acid damage to an organic creature or
object, 5d8 points of acid damage to a metallic creature or
object, or 1d10 points of acid damage to a stony creature
(such as an earth elemental) or object. A gallon or more of
water is needed to wash off the mucus.
Portal (Su): Lining the lowest part of the fiendwurm’s
gizzard is a portal to the Abyss that is activated by the presence of a living creature. A swallowed creature must make
a Reflex save (DC 31) each round to avoid falling into or
being squeezed through the portal. The Abyssal side of the
portal is stationary, but the other side moves with the
fiendwurm. If this portal is permanently closed, the fiendwurm instantly dies but does not implode.
Tremorsense (Ex): A fiendwurm can automatically
sense the location of anything within 120 feet that is in
contact with the ground.
FIHYR
Fihyrs are the collected fears of humanity made corporeal.
These creatures were once thought to be related to beholders, but in fact there is no connection between the two kinds
of monsters aside from a superficial resemblance.
As the remnants of hundreds of people’s nightmares swirl
through the ether, they somehow combine with leftover magical power and coalesce into these physical monsters. A few
random dream images aren’t enough; it takes the strong emotional energy of a mass of people under duress to spawn a fihyr.
The right combination of conditions is most often found in
cities that are under siege, or being terrorized by monsters, or
suffering from famine, civil war, or some other mass trauma.
Great fihyrs are larger, more intelligent, and much more
dangerous than the smaller variety. A great fihyr forms
when a number of small fihyrs combine.
All fihyrs have the same general appearance; the two kinds
differ mainly in size. A fihyr is a roughly spherical blob of soft
tissue and pulsating gray matter, much like a gigantic brain
with a partial layer of skin stretched over it. The body of a
fihyr is about 2 feet in diameter; that of a great fihyr is closer
to 7 feet. Two large tentacles hang below the body and serve as
the creature’s legs. A mass of much smaller, constantly
writhing and twining tentacles projects from its body; these
help it maintain its balance. Numerous mouths and eyes are
placed at random along the “front” side of the creature’s body.
The eyes are a startling gold color with horizontal black
pupils, and the mouths are lined with needle-sharp teeth. The
mottled skin of a fihyr runs the full spectrum of colors, but
FIHYR
Fihyr Great Fihyr
Small Aberration Medium-Size Aberration
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp) 16d8 +16 (88 hp)
Initiative: +3 +6
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (good)
AC: 18 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +4 natural), 18 (+2 Dex, +6 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 15 touch 12, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Bite +2 melee 4 bites +12 melee
Damage: Bite 1d4–2 Bite 2d6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Frightful presence Emotion control, frightful presence
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., SR 10, vulnerable to sunlight Darkvision 60 ft., invisibility, SR 18
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +4, Will +5 Fort +8, Ref +9, Will +14
Abilities: Str 7, Dex 16, Con 10, Int 5, Wis 12, Cha 7 Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 15
Skills: Hide +10, Move Silently +9, Spot +8 Hide +16, Move Silently +21, Open Lock +17,
Spot +12
Feats: — Dodge, Great Fortitude, Improved Initiative,
Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes
Climate/Terrain: Any city, town, or village Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or brood (3–4) Solitary
Challenge Rating: 3 15
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Small); 9–12 HD (Medium-size) 17–24 HD (Medium-size); 25–48 HD (Large)always in dull, sickly shades. An oily sheen covers the surface
of the creature’s body.
Fihyrs rarely survive beyond the night of their formation,
and they never leave the troubled area that spawned them.
Great fihyrs, on the other hand, survive until slain. They
have been known to wander for hundreds of miles, from
one tormented spot to another, feeding on the fear and
despair of the inhabitants.
COMBAT
Both kinds of fihyrs attack by biting. The real purpose of a
fihyr’s bite is not to deal damage, but to spread fear in others.
FIHYR
Fihyrs never hesitate to attack, but they prefer to do so in
front of as many witnesses as possible, to make use of their
frightful presence ability.
Frightful Presence (Ex): Any creature that witnesses a
fihyr attacking becomes panicked if it fails a Will save
(DC 10).
Vulnerable to Sunlight (Ex): Fihyrs die instantly when
exposed to sunlight, hissing and bubbling away into acrid
smoke. They have no fear of sunlight, however, and they don’t
seek shelter to wait out the day. Magical sunlight can destroy a
fihyr if it penetrates the creature’s spell resistance, though if
the fihyr succeeds at any allowed saving throw, it avoids the
instant death effect.
GREAT FIHYR
Great fihyrs begin any conflict by using their emotion control
ability to generate negative emotions on which they can feed.
Once they decide to become visible, they immediately attack
so as to use their frightful presence ability.
Great fihyrs are unaffected by sunlight, but they despise
it. Thus, they prefer to lay low during the day in dark,
secluded spots, such as caves, dungeons, abandoned buildings, and the like.
Frightful Presence (Ex): Any creature that witnesses a
great fihyr attacking becomes panicked if it fails a Will save
(DC 20).
Emotion Control (Sp): At will, the great fihyr can produce
an effect like that of an emotion spell (despair, fear, or hate
only; caster level 16th; Will save DC 16), except that its
range is 260 feet, its radius is 15 feet, and it lasts as long as
the creature concentrates on it. The great fihyr can use this
ability and remain invisible.
Invisibility (Ex): A great fihyr can become invisible at
will. This effect is like that of the invisibility spell, except
that the creature can remain invisible as long as it
wishes, even while using its emotion control ability. Normally, a great fihyr is visible only immediately after
delivering a melee attack.
FIRBOLG
Large Giant
Hit Dice: 13d8+78 (136 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 25 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +3 masterwork studded leather,
+12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Huge greatsword +21/+16 melee, or rock +10
ranged
Damage: Huge greatsword 2d8+19/19–20, rock 2d6+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Rock throwing, spell-like abilities, trample
2d8+19
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 3, rock
catching
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +5, Will +6
Abilities: Str 36, Dex 13, Con 23, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Knowledge (nature) +5, Move Silently +5, Spot +8,
Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: Deflect Arrows, Dodge, Improved Unarmed Strike
Climate/Terrain: Temperate hills and forest
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–8), squad (9–16), or
troop (20–40)
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
101
FIRBOLG102
Firbolgs are reclusive giants who tend to avoid contact with
humanoid races and even other kinds of giants. Unlike
some of the more brutish giantkin, firbolgs do not depend
heavily on raiding for subsistence, nor do they rely solely on
force to resolve problems.
A firbolg looks like a 10-foot-tall human and weighs
more than 800 pounds. Its skin is a fleshy pink color, and
it can have hair of almost any shade, although blond and
red are the most common.A firbolg of either gender
wears its hair long, and the typical male sports a great,
thick beard.
Firbolgs speak Giant and Common.
COMBAT
Firbolgs are both cautious and crafty. They
have learned to distrust and fear the “civilized” races, such as humans and
elves. If possible, they avoid
encounters with humanoids altogether, either by
hiding or by deception.
If forced to fight, firbolgs
employ effective combat strategy,
using the terrain and situation to best
effect. They always operate as a team, not
as a collection of individuals.
Rock Throwing (Ex): An adult firbolg
receives a +1 racial bonus on attack
rolls when throwing rocks. It can
throw rocks weighing 40 to 50
pounds each (Small objects) up to
five range increments (range
increment 130 feet).
Spell-Like Abilities:
1/day—alter self, detect magic,
feeblemind, know direction.
Caster level 13th; save
DC 12 + spell level.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn
each round, a firbolg can trample
opponents at least one size category smaller than itself.
This attack deals 2d8+19 points of bludgeoning damage.
A trampled opponent can attempt either an attack of
opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC 29) for
half damage.
Fast Healing (Ex): A firbolg regains lost hit points at the
rate of 3 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit points
lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not
allow the firbolg to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Rock Catching (Ex): A firbolg can catch Small, Mediumsize, or Large rocks (or projectiles of similar shape). Once
per round, a firbolg that would normally be hit by a rock
can make a Reflex save to catch it as a free action. The DC is
15 for a Small rock, 20 for a Medium-size one, and 25 for a
Large one. (If the projectile has a bonus on attack rolls
because of magic, the DC increases by that amount.) The firbolg must be ready for and aware of the attack.
FIRBOLG SOCIETY
Firbolgs usually live in well-fortified colonies, either in the
depths of the forest or in cavern complexes dug into hillsides. All firbolg settlements are protected by guard towers.
These creatures live primarily by hunting and gathering, but
each colony also practices simple agriculture.
FIRBOLG CHARACTERS
A troop of firbolgs usually has a
druid as its leader. Any other
ranked members have levels in
the barbarian class. A firbolg’s
favored class is druid.
A firbolg PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 18. Thus, a
1st-level firbolg druid has an ECL of 19 and
is the equivalent of a 19th-level character.
FIRE BAT
Small Elemental (Fire)
Hit Dice: 6d8–6 (21 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 10 ft., fly 50 ft. (good)
AC: 16 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Bite +8 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6–1 plus 1d6 fire
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Attach, burn, devour
Special Qualities: Blindsight 120
ft., elemental traits, fire subtype,
regeneration 5
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +8, Will +0
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 17,
Con 8, Int 6, Wis 7, Cha 5
Skills: Hide +15, Listen +9,
Spot +9
Feats: Flyby Attack, Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Elemental Plane of Fire or volcanoes
Organization: Solitary or swarm (11–20)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 7–12 HD (Small); 13–18 HD (Medium-size)
Fire bats are native to the Elemental Plane of Fire, but unlike
fire elementals, they are not composed solely of elemental
material. They can fly through the flames and magma of the
Elemental Plane of Fire as easily as normal bats fly through
FIRE BAT
MDthe air. They propel themselves by expelling heated gases
from tubes within their bodies, flapping their wings only to
steer during flight.
A fire bat cannot enter water or
any other nonflammable liquid. A
body of water is an impassible barrier unless the fire bat can
step, jump or fly over it.
Fire bats feed on living
creatures, attaching to targets and
devouring flesh until they are sated.
A sated fire bat has a 25% chance of
splitting into two hungry fire bats
during the next 24 hours.
A fire bat’s body is about
2 feet long, and its wingspan is about 4 feet. The
creature burns continuously with an unbearably hot, red flame,
which makes it look larger
than it really is. Until it is
slain and its body cools, it’s
impossible to tell that it is
not just swirling fire in the
shape of a large bat.
Fire elementals get along well
with fire bats, but salamanders,
efreet, and most other creatures of fire prey on them.
Such a check on their population is vital, since they not
only regenerate but also multiply very quickly where food
is plentiful. Without natural predators, they could overrun the entire Elemental Plane of Fire within weeks.
COMBAT
In combat, fire bats display a level of cunning that belies
their limited intelligence, dividing their attacks evenly
among all the possible targets. Once a fire bat is sated (see
devour, below), it breaks off and leaves the fight. When
one-fourth of the swarm is sated or slain, all the remaining fire bats break off and flee, only to shadow their prey
and attack again when the time is right. They repeat this
pattern until the whole swarm has fed.
Attach (Ex): If a fire bat hits with its bite attack, it latches
onto the opponent’s body. An attached fire bat is effectively
grappling its prey. The fire bat loses its Dexterity bonus to
AC (giving it an AC of 13) but holds on with great tenacity,
dealing 1d6 points of fire damage each round it remains
attached. An attached fire bat can be struck with a weapon
or grappled itself. To remove an attached fire bat through
grappling, the opponent must achieve a pin (see Grapple
in Chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook) against the fire bat.
Each grapple attempt subjects the opponent to the fire
bat’s burn attack.
Burn (Ex):
Any creature
that is hit by a
fire bat’s bite attack (or that hits
the fire bat with a
natural weapon or an
unarmed attack) must succeed at a Reflex save (DC 12)
or catch fire (see Catching
on Fire in Chapter 3 of the
DUNGEON MASTER’S Guide). The
fire burns for 1d4 rounds.
Immersing a fire bat in at least
10 gallons of water extinguishes its flames and prevents it from flying but does
not otherwise harm the creature. The fire bat’s flames
reignite after 10 rounds.
Devour (Ex): Once it is attached, a fire bat devours the
opponent’s flesh, automatically dealing 1d6–1 points of bite
damage and 1d6 points of fire damage each round it
remains attached. After dealing 6 points of damage, the
fire bat is sated; on the next round it detaches and flies
away to digest the meal.
Blindsight (Ex): A fire bat emits high-frequency
sounds, inaudible to most other creatures, that bounce off
nearby objects and creatures. This ability enables it to
discern objects and creatures within 120 feet. The fire
bat usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks
to notice creatures within range of its blindsight. A silence
spell negates this ability and forces the fire bat to rely on its
weak vision (which has a maximum range of 10 feet).
Elemental Traits (Ex): A fire bat is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits
or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Fire Subtype (Ex): A fire bat is immune to fire damage
but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw
for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes
half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Regeneration (Ex): Cold attacks deal normal damage to a
fire bat.
Skills: A fire bat receives a +4 racial bonus on Spot and Listen checks. *These bonuses are lost if its blindsight is negated.
FIRE BAT FAMILIARS
If your campaign uses the Improved Familiar feat from
Tome and Blood: A Guide Book to Wizards and Sorcerers, a fire
bat is an appropriate improved familiar for a 15th-level or
higher arcane spellcaster of the fire subtype. Like other
improved familiars, a fire bat familiar provides no special
benefits to its master beyond the standard familiar benefits (see Familiars in Chapter 3 of the Player’s Handbook).
103
FIRE BAT
JJ104
FLESH JELLY
Gargantuan Ooze
Hit Dice: 18d10+108 (237 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 4 (–4 size, –2 Dex), touch 4, flat-footed 4
Attacks: 4 slams +20 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+11
Space/Reach: 30 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Absorb, disease, engulf
Special Qualities: Blindsight, horrid stench, ooze traits
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +4, Will +1
Abilities: Str 32, Dex 6, Con 23, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest, plains or marsh
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 19–36 HD (Colossal)
A flesh jelly is a nauseating mound of stinking flesh that
gorges itself on any creatures unfortunate enough to cross
its path. These ravenous oozes are usually found in tropical regions.
A flesh jelly is a blob of soft, fleshy tissue surrounded by a
filthy membrane composed of skin, hair, and fur. When it
moves, a few of the loose bones inside it press against the
outer membrane, causing its disgusting body to bulge out
here and there. The creature has no eyes, ears, or mouth.
COMBAT
Driven by its raging hunger, a flesh
jelly simply rolls over its foes, absorbing them into its body mass.
When facing a group, it usually
concentrates on engulfing
one target, then defends
itself by lashing out at
other opponents with its
fleshy pseudopods while
attempting to absorb
its meal.
Absorb (Ex):
A flesh jelly
feeds by absorbing other creatures into its
bulk. Any creature engulfed by
the monster must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 25) or be
absorbed into its mass and die. A successful save prevents
absorption that round. Each absorbed creature heals a flesh
jelly of 2d6 points of damage. A flesh jelly expels the
absorbed creature’s personal belongings from its body 1d3
rounds after absorption. Nothing short of a wish or similar
magic can restore a creature that has been absorbed.
Disease (Ex): Any creature engulfed by a flesh jelly or hit
by its slam attack must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 25)
or contract filth fever. The incubation period is 1d3 days,
and the disease deals 1d3 points of Dexterity damage and
1d3 points of Constitution damage (see Disease in Chapter 3
of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
Engulf (Ex): A flesh jelly can simply bowl over creatures
up to one size category smaller than itself as a standard
action. This attack affects as many opponents as the flesh
jelly’s body can cover. Each target can make either an attack
of opportunity against the flesh jelly or a Reflex save (DC
30) to avoid being engulfed. A successful saving throw indicates that the target has been pushed back or aside (target’s
choice) as the ooze moves forward. An engulfed creature is
considered grappled and trapped within the flesh jelly’s
body. A flesh jelly cannot make a slam attack during a round
in which it attempts to engulf, but each engulfed creature
takes automatic slam damage and must save against disease
(see above) on that round and every round thereafter that it
remains trapped. On any round after engulfing a creature,
the flesh jelly can attempt to absorb it.
Blindsight (Ex): A flesh jelly is blind, but its entire body
is a primitive sensory organ that can ascertain prey by scent
and vibration. This ability enables it to discern objects and
creatures within 60 feet. The flesh jelly usually does not
need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures
within range of its blindsight.
Horrid Stench (Ex): Any corporeal creature with 10 or
fewer Hit Dice that comes within 50 feet of a flesh
jelly must make a
Fortitude saving
throw (DC 25) or be
nauseated for the next
2d6 rounds. Another
save is required at the
end of that time if
the creature is still
within range. A single successful save
against this effect
renders the creature immune to
that flesh jelly’s
horrid stench for
24 hours. A nauseated creature cannot
attack, cast spells,
concentrate on spells,
or do anything else requiring attention. The only action permitted is a single move or move-equivalent action.
Ooze Traits: A flesh jelly is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing.
It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.
FLESH JELLYFOMORIAN
Huge Giant
Hit Dice: 15d8+90 (157 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 21 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +9 natural, +3 hide armor), touch 9,
flat-footed 20
Attacks: Gargantuan heavy flail +21/+16/+11 melee, or 2
slams +21 melee
Damage: Gargantuan heavy flail 2d8+18/19–20, slam 1d8+12
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 5 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Trample 2d10+18
Special Qualities: DR 5/–, fast healing 5, scent
Saves: Fort +15, Ref +6, Will +6
Abilities: Str 34, Dex 12, Con 22, Int 11, Wis 13, Cha 9
Skills: Listen +3, Move Silently +16, Spot +12
Feats: Alertness, Cleave, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any mountains and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or
gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually
neutral evil
Advancement: By
character class
Fomorians are grossly
deformed behemoths
that live in mountain caves,
abandoned mines, or other
subterranean areas. They rarely
modify their homes for comfort or convenience; they
simply adapt to their surroundings. Their territories are
commonly marked by the partially
consumed bodies of their victims.
Each fomorian has a different set of
physical deformities. These can include
a misplaced or misshapen limb, a misplaced facial feature, a hunchback, a
bulging body part, drooping
flesh, flapping ears, a
huge snout, large feet
on short legs, and
many others. Patches
of hair as tough as wire
are scattered over its pale white
skin, and large warts and other growths dot its thick hide.
Unlike other giants, fomorians can survive on relatively
little food, considering the size of their bodies. They eat
almost any organic matter they come across, from molds
and lichens to humanoid prey, which is their favorite.
A fomorian speaks Giant and one other language (usually
Common).
COMBAT
Fomorians usually try to sneak up on opponents and hit as
hard as they can. If they bother to keep captured opponents alive after combat, it is only for the entertainment
they gain from crude torture before eating their fallen
foes. Fomorians do not throw or catch rocks as other
giants do.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a fomorian can trample opponents at least one size
category smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d10+18 points
of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 29) for half damage.
Fast Healing (Ex): A
fomorian regains lost hit
points at the rate of 5 per
round. Fast healing does
not restore hit points lost
from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not allow the
fomorian to regrow or reattach lost
body parts.
Scent (Ex): A fomorian can
detect approaching enemies, sniff
out hidden foes, and track by sense
of smell.
Skills: A fomorian has a +10 racial
bonus on Move Silently checks.
FOMORIAN SOCIETY
Depravity and wickedness rule
fomorian society. The strongest
and cruelest rules over all the
others within reach, and
women and children are treated
as slaves in every household. Acts of
violence, sometimes resulting in permanent injury or death, are common
among fomorians. Anyone who can
completely dominate a fomorian can
use the creature as an ally, but such
an alliance lasts only as long
as the fomorian fears the
dominant being.
FOMORIAN
CHARACTERS
A fomorian’s favored class is barbarian. Gang leaders are
either druids or barbarian/druids.
A fomorian PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 17. Thus, a 1st-level fomorian barbarian has
an ECL of 18 and is the equivalent of a 18th-level character.
105
FOMORIAN106
FOREST SLOTH
Large Beast
Hit Dice: 14d10+70 (147 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 40 ft., brachiation 40 ft., climb 60 ft.
AC: 21 (–1 size, +5 Dex, +7 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 16
Attacks: 2 claws +16 melee and bite +11 melee
Damage: Claw 2d4+7, bite 2d8+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision,
poison immunity, scent
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +14, Will +5
Abilities: Str 25, Dex 20, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 9
Skills: Climb +15*, Listen +7, Move Silently, +8*, Spot +6*
Climate/Terrain: Warm forests
Organization: Solitary, pair, or family (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 15–21 HD (Large); 22–42 HD (Huge)
The territorial forest sloth is a nocturnal hunter that roams
tropical forests and jungles. This creature is not the slowmoving beast its name implies; in fact, it possesses lightning-fast reflexes and can travel as quickly over land as it
does through trees. It is particularly fond of halfling flesh.
Standing 8 feet tall, a forest sloth is a sinewy beast with a
large, toothy mouth. Its tremendous jaws support a row of
oversized, needle-sharp front teeth. Each of a forest sloth’s
limbs ends in three toes tipped with huge, curved claws. Its
fur color ranges from olive to brown.
Forest sloths communicate with each
other using screeches and grunts.
COMBAT
The forest sloth typically attacks by
leaping on prey with a frenzy of bite and
claw attacks. Families of forest sloths
often hunt together, using one as a scout
to lure prey into the trees where the rest of
the group waits in ambush.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a forest sloth
hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself with both claw attacks, it deals
normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +21). If it gets a hold, it transfers
the opponent to its mouth as a free action and
automatically hits with its bite attack in the
same round. It can then try to swallow its prey
in the next round. Alternatively, the forest sloth
has the option to conduct the grapple normally,
or simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the forest sloth is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A forest sloth can swallow a creature that is at least two size categories smaller than itself by
making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +21),
provided that the opponent is already in its mouth at the
start of its turn. Once inside the sloth, the opponent takes
2d4+7 points of bludgeoning damage plus 1d8 points of
acid damage per round from the sloth’s gullet. A successful
grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of
the gullet and return to the sloth’s mouth, where another
successful grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively,
a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with either
claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at least
25 points of damage to the gullet (AC 20) in this way creates
an opening large enough to permit escape. Once a single
swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole;
thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way
out. A Large forest sloth’s gullet can hold 2 Small, 8 Tiny, or
32 Diminutive or smaller creatures.
Scent (Ex): A forest sloth can detect
approaching enemies, sniff out hidden
foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: *A forest sloth receives a
+4 racial bonus on Climb, Move
Silently, and Spot checks when in
forested areas.
FOREST
SLOTHFROST SALAMANDER
Medium-Size Magical Beast (Cold)
Hit Dice: 12d10+12 (78 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
AC: 17 (+2 Dex, +5 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 4 claws +12 melee and bite +10 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6/19–20, bite 1d6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Cold aura
Special Qualities: Cold subtype, darkvision 60 ft., DR
15/+1, low-light vision
Saves: Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +5
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 7
Skills: Climb +8, Hide +14, Listen +3, Move Silently +13,
Spot +3
Feats: Alertness, Improved Critical (claw), Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Any cold and underground
Organization: Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 13–18 HD (Large); 19–24 HD (Huge);
25–36 HD (Gargantuan)
Frost salamanders can be found in many
extremely cold places on the Material
Plane. Ice caves, glaciers, frozen lakes,
and other places where the temperature seldom rises above freezing are
their favorite haunts.
A frost salamander’s ice-blue,
serpentine body has six legs,
a long tail, and a reptilian
head. Its claws are equipped
with talons that resemble
icicles. These claws not only
make vicious weapons, they
allow the creature to climb
any ice-covered surface—
even a vertical wall.
Frost salamanders are
omnivorous, but they prefer their food frozen. If
prey is plentiful, they may
keep particularly delectable items, such as yetis and
adventurers, frozen in their
lair for years until the right
craving strikes them.
COMBAT
In combat, a frost salamander
rears up on its two hind legs and
slashes with all four front legs while biting with its vicious
teeth. It might also try bull rushing an enemy backward into
a pool of freezing water.
Cold Aura (Ex): A frost salamander emanates such
intense cold that each creature within 20 feet takes 1d8
points of cold damage per round (no saving throw). Magical
effects that shield against cold work against this aura, but
normal measures (such as heavy furs or insulation) do not.
Cold Subtype (Ex): A frost salamander is immune to cold
damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature
takes half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
GALEB DUHR
Medium-Size Elemental (Earth)
Hit Dice: 8d8+40 (76 hp)
Initiative: –3
Speed: 10 ft., burrow 10 ft.
AC: 22 (–3 Dex, +15 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 22
Attacks: 2 slams +7 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: DR 15/+1, elemental traits, freeze, SR 21,
tremorsense
Saves: Fort +11, Ref –1,
Will +7
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 5,
Con 20, Int 11, Wis 16,
Cha 12
Skills: Concentration +12,
Diplomacy +3, Knowledge
(geography) +7, Perform +10
(ballad, chant, sing, storytelling, and five others),
Sense Motive +14
Feats: Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Any mountain
Organization: Solitary, pair, or
tumble (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: No coins; standard goods (gems
only); standard items (potions only)
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 9–15 HD (Mediumsize); 16–24 HD (Large)
Galeb duhrs are among the oddest creatures that an adventurer can encounter, but
they are seldom dangerous. They live only in the mountains and seldom, if ever, venture onto other terrain. It is
not known whether galeb duhrs can reproduce on the
107
FROST
SALAMANDER108
Material Plane, or whether the ones found there have all
come from the Elemental Plane of Earth.
To all appearances a galeb duhr is a living boulder with
two dark, brooding eyes, a mouth, and rough-hewn
appendages that serve as hands and feet. The typical galeb
duhr stands about 4 feet tall,
though advanced versions
can reach heights of up
to 16 feet.
When sitting perfectly still (an activity that occupies
much of its time), a galeb duhr is nearly indistinguishable
from the surrounding stone—so much so that many travelers walk right past one without realizing it. Galeb duhrs
do love to sing, however, and occasionally their deep, resonant, slow, and often palpably sad songs reveal their presence. The frequency of much of their singing falls below
the range of human hearing, but the subsonic tones can be
felt through the ground for many miles and tend to make
horses nervous.
As one might imagine, galeb duhrs are slow-moving,
slow to anger, slow to action, and always take the long view.
They have no known enemies except time. Now and then
reckless monsters or adventurers attack them, hoping to
acquire either gems or information about where to find
rich veins of gold or other precious ore. Such attempts are
generally doomed before they even begin. Galeb duhrs do
know all there is to know about their mountain homes,
both aboveground and below, but forcing them to give up
those details is difficult in the extreme.
To further complicate matters, galeb duhrs are quite territorial, even to the point of feeling protective about rocks and
boulders, in much the same way that a treant feels responsible for the forest in which it lives. Anyone damaging,
destroying, or even mining the mountains near a galeb
duhr’s home often discovers some very staunch opposition.
COMBAT
Galeb duhrs are usually solitary creatures, though they
occasionally live with a few of their own kind. When
approached, a galeb duhr can easily make it itself unnoticed. When irritated into combat, however, it attacks
with its slams.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—animate objects (stone
only), stone shape; 1/day—move earth, passwall, transmute
rock to mud, wall of stone. Caster level 20th; save DC 11 +
spell level.
Elemental Traits (Ex): A galeb duhr is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject
to critical hits or flanking, and it cannot be raised or
resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-
foot range).
Freeze (Ex): A galeb duhr can hold itself
so still that it appears to be a boulder. An
observer must succeed at a Spot check
(DC 30) to notice that it is really alive.
Tremorsense (Ex): A galeb duhr
can automatically sense the location of anything within 300 feet
that is in contact with the ground.
GAMBOL
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 8d10+16 (60 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 30 ft., climb 15 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +4 Dex, +5 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Bite +13 melee and 2 claws +11 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+6, claw 1d4+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear aura, great leap
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., evasion, haste, lowlight vision, masterful dodge
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +12, Will +3
Abilities: Str 23, Dex 18, Con 15, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 9
Skills: Balance +6, Climb +14, Jump +33, Tumble +14
Feats: Lightning Reflexes, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest
Organization: Solitary, pack (5–20) or troop (21–40)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: 9–12 HD (Large); 13–24 HD (Huge)
These carnivorous cousins of the ape are fiercely territorial
marauders. They obsessively prowl the jungle, attacking
anything that enters the area they claim.
GAMBOLA gambol is a baboonlike primate that stands 9 feet tall
and weighs more than 1,000 pounds. Its purple skin is covered with dense, silky, blue hair. A gambol has elongated
jaws and a hairless, doglike muzzle.
COMBAT
Gambols tumble into combat, clawing and biting their foes.
They take advantage of their reach to grapple and trip
advancing foes. Their constant maneuvering makes them
difficult targets for foes attacking from a distance.
Fear Aura (Su): When a gambol howls, every creature
within a 100-foot radius must succeed at a Will save (DC 13)
or become panicked for 1d6+1 rounds. Whether or not the
save is successful, the creature is then immune to that
gambol’s howl for 24 hours. The howl is a sonic, mind-affecting fear effect.
Great Leap (Ex): A gambol gains a +25 bonus on Jump
checks. Maximum distance restrictions do not apply to
its jumps.
Evasion (Ex): A gambol that makes a successful Reflex
saving throw against an effect that would normally deal half
damage instead avoids damage altogether.
Haste (Su): A gambol can take an extra partial action each
round. This ability is always active.
Masterful Dodge (Ex): As a free action once per
round, a gambol can dodge one ranged weapon attack,
one reach melee weapon attack, or one spell that requires
an attack roll by making a successful Reflex save (DC 20).
An attack using a weapon with an enhancement bonus
increases the save DC by the amount of the bonus, and a
spell adds its spell level to the save DC. To use this ability, the gambol must be aware of the attack and not be
flat-footed.
GIANT
Giants are humanoid-shaped beings of great size
with even greater strength. They accomplish
much through sheer determination and brute
force, and in fact most rely on their might to
solve problems. Giants can inflict tremendous damage on those who anger or
oppose them, but they can also put their
strength to good use in aiding their allies.
Many giants subsist by hunting or
taking what they want from smaller,
weaker beings. A few are not so cruel,
raising what crops and livestock they
need to survive.
All giants speak Giant. A giant with an
Intelligence score of at least 10 also
speaks Common.
COMBAT
Giants relish melee combat. They favor massive
weapons, especially two-handed ones, and wield them
with impressive skill. They possess enough cunning to
soften up a foe with ranged attacks before closing, if they
can. A giant’s favorite ranged weapon is a big rock.
Rock Throwing (Ex): An adult giant is an accomplished rock thrower, so he or she receives a +1 racial
bonus on attack rolls when throwing rocks. A giant of at
least Huge size can hurl rocks weighing 60 to 80 pounds
each (Medium-size objects) up to five range increments.
The size of the range increment varies with the giant’s
kind (see individual entries). A Colossal giant can hurl
rocks weighing 160 to 200 pounds (Huge objects).
Rock Catching (Ex): A giant of at least Huge size can
catch Small, Medium-size, Large, or Huge rocks (or projectiles of similar shape). A Colossal giant can catch rocks of up
to Colossal size. Once per round, a giant that would normally be hit by a rock can make a Reflex save to catch it as a
free action. The DC to catch a rock is based on the rock’s size
(see table below). If the projectile has a bonus on attack rolls
because of magic, the DC increases by that amount. The
giant must be ready for and aware of the attack.
Rock Size DC
Small 15
Medium-size 20
Large 25
Huge 30
Gargantuan 35
Colossal 40
GIANT SOCIETY
Solitary giants are usually young adults striking out on their
own. Gangs are usually made up of young adults who hunt
or raid (or both) together. Giant bands typically consist of
young adults and their mates, servants, or guards. About a
third of the giants in a band or tribe are children.
109
GIANT
AW110
Giant children can be formidable opponents in their own
right. When a group of giants includes children, roll d% for
each child to determine his or her maturity level: 01–25
infant (no combat ability); 26–50 juvenile (two size categories
smaller than an adult, 8 fewer Hit Dice, –8 to Strength and
Constitution scores, and 1 rank in each skill that an adult
has); 51–100 adolescent (one size category smaller than an
adult, 4 fewer Hit Dice, –4 to Strength and Constitution
scores, and 2, 3, or 4 ranks in each skill that an adult has).
Giant children can throw rocks if they meet the minimum
size requirement. Except as noted, giant children are identical with adults of the same kind.
FOREST GIANT
Forest giants are among the tallest specimens of giantkind,
and they can live to be up to 200 years old. They are powerful
hunters that pose a threat to all animals that dwell in the woods.
An adult forest giant stands 18 feet tall but weighs only
3,000 pounds. The lanky, muscular body resembles that of a
wood elf but appears much sturdier. The creature has deep,
earth-yellow skin and pale green hair that is usually wild
and unkempt. The typical clothing for either gender is made
of fur or leather, and each forest giant also wears some bone
jewelry, particularly necklaces and earrings.
A forest giant’s bag contains everything needed to survive in
the wilderness, including tools to make and repair weapons,
2d4 rocks, 1d4+4 mundane items, and the giant’s personal
wealth. These items tend to be parts of things it killed for food,
such as scraps of fur and hide, dried insects, and bones.
Combat
Forest giants target opponents from afar with their poisoned
arrows. Though they are not averse to attacking with their
clubs, their poison-tipped, ranged weapons often end a
battle quickly with few casualties for the giants. Forest
giants use their natural camouflage abilities to hide among
the trees and wait in ambush for the next creature that
crosses their path. Their thrown rocks have a range increment of 120 feet.
Poison (Ex): Forest giants coat their arrows with poison
(Fortitude save DC 22). The initial and secondary damage is
the same (unconsciousness for 4d4 rounds).
Skills: A forest giant has a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks. * In wooded areas, this bonus rises to +8.
Forest Giant Society
Forest giants live solely in wooded areas regardless of the
climate. These ravenous meat-eaters hunt nearly any kind
GIANT
Forest Giant Sun Giant
Huge Giant Huge Giant (Fire)
Hit Dice: 13d8+78 (136 hp) 13d8+91 (149 hp)
Initiative: +5 +2
Speed: 40 ft. 40 ft.
AC: 20 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +11 natural), 20 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +10 natural),
touch 9, flat-footed 19 touch 10, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Gargantuan greatclub +18/+13 melee, or Gargantuan Gargantuan longspear +20/+15 melee, or rock
mighty composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) +10 ranged
+8/+3 ranged, or rock +9 ranged
Damage: Gargantuan greatclub 2d8+16, Gargantuan Gargantuan longspear 2d8+19/×3, rock
mighty composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) 2d8+13
2d8+4/×3, rock 2d8+11
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Poisoned arrows, rock throwing Rock throwing, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., rock catching Darkvision 60 ft., fire subtype, rock catching
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +5, Will +7 Fort +15, Ref +6, Will +8
Abilities: Str 33, Dex 12, Con 22, Int 14, Wis 16, Cha 21 Str 37, Dex 14, Con 25, Int 15, Wis 18, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +5*, Listen +5, Sense Motive +6, Spot +7 Handle Animal +6, Hide +8*, Listen +8, Spot +7
Feats: Improved Initiative, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot Alertness, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot
Climate/Terrain: Any forest Warm and temperate deserts
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), band (6–9 plus 35% Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), or family (3–8 plus
noncombatants plus 1 1st–2nd level druid), 1–4 noncombatants plus 1 4th–6th level
or hunting/raiding party (6–9 plus 35% adept, cleric, or sorcerer)
noncombatants plus 1 3rd–5th level druid)
Challenge Rating: 11 12
Treasure: Standard coins; double goods; standard items Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class By character classof animal or beast for its flesh. Forest giants maintain
friendly relations with fey, and they cooperate with other
primitive woodland beings who enjoy the same hunting
lifestyle as they do.
Forest Giant Characters
A forest giant’s favored class is ranger. Many groups of forest
giants include both druids and rangers.
A forest giant PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal
to its class level + 16. Thus, a 1st-level forest giant ranger has
an ECL of 17 and is the equivalent of a 17th-level character.
SUN GIANT
Sun giants are cruel nomads who eke out a living raising
livestock under the bleakest of conditions. Most are grim
and brutal, caring little for the trappings of civilization. Despite their harsh existence, they are long-lived beings, often
reaching 400 years or more in age.
A sun giant’s skin is parched and wrinkled from years of
living in harsh, desertlike conditions. Hair that is soft and
black in childhood becomes dry, ashen, and brittle with
the passing of time. Only the creature’s eyes seem unaffected by the desert—they sparkle a bright blue color.
The typical sun giant stands 16 feet tall and weighs 7,000
pounds. The usual garb for either gender is a loose, lightcolored robe that covers the legs, body, and arms, plus a
cloth burnoose looped around the head and face to protect
the skin from the burning sun. A sun giant never wears
shoes, either for walking or riding.
A sun giant’s bag contains 1d2 rocks, 1d6+4 mundane
items, and the giant’s personal wealth. Personal possessions usually include simple things such as sand
sculptures, coins, and prized gifts from esteemed sun
giant leaders.
Combat
Sun giants use their natural camouflage ability to hide amid
the sand dunes, where they lie in wait for enemies with
spears at the ready. They rarely throw rocks, but when they
do, the range increment is 120 feet. In melee, sun giants
prefer to pound opponents with their fists. During times of
war, they fight mounted, seated upon Gargantuan steeds
that they raise and train themselves. When weaponless, a sun
giant uses its spell-like abilities
to keep foes at bay.
Spell-Like Abilities: At
will—spike stones, stone shape, wall
of stone. Caster level 13th; save
DC 12 + spell level.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A
sun giant is immune to fire
d a m a g e
b u t
takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for
half damage is allowed. In that case, the giant takes half
damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Skills: A sun giant has a +4 racial bonus on Hide checks.
*In desert areas, this bonus rises to +8.
Sun Giant Society
Sun giants dwell in the desert, but they never set up permanent homes there because they enjoy the freedom that comes
with living in tents. They almost always ride rather than traveling on foot. They prefer living mounts such as rocs and
giant lizards, but when such creatures are scarce, they are
quite willing to have their clerics animate dead mounts.
As herders, sun giants see all land as theirs for the taking,
so they graze their animals anywhere food is available. This
destructive practice often strips fields bare and turns the
land barren, earning sun giants few friends in the desert.
Sun Giant Characters
Most groups of sun giants include clerics with access to any
two of the following domains: Destruction, Fire, Sun, Travel,
and War. A sun giant’s favored class is ranger.
A sun giant PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 16. Thus, a 1st-level sun giant ranger has an
ECL of 17 and is the equivalent of a 17th-level character.
OCEAN GIANT
The noble ocean giants are deep-sea dwellers who delight
in the tossing waves and the rich life of the underwater
world. These usually peaceful creatures are nevertheless
quick to anger
when anyone
finds fault with
their ways. Ocean
giants frequently
live to be 600
years old.
The barrelchested body of
an ocean giant
is powerfully
built, and the
face has an almost leonine
quality. Coppery
skin is complemented by flowing white hair
that streams out
in waves as the
giant swims. In
natural form, an
ocean giant has
a fishlike tail like
that of a merfolk,
111
GIANT112
though the landform ability (see below) provides an alternate form in which the tail is replaced by legs. An ocean
giant of either gender measures 16 feet in length and weighs
more than 4,000 pounds. On land, the typical ocean giant
wears light clothing that is unlikely to impede swimming
should that become necessary. Underwater, clothing is
spurned except for a belt pouch to carry personal effects.
An ocean giant’s bag contains 1d2 rocks, 1d6+4 mundane
items, and the giant’s personal wealth. These items tend to
be sea-related items such as navigation instruments, sea
shells, pearls, and treasure found on sunken ships.
Combat
Whether fighting on the surface or underwater, an ocean
giant usually wields a massive trident. On land, ocean giants
prefer to keep their foes at a distance. They hurl rocks (range
increment 120 feet) at closing enemies and even ships that
are not welcome in their territory. In close combat on land,
or when unarmed, they hammer opponents with their fists
and slap with their tails.
Amphibious (Ex): Although ocean giants have gills for
breathing underwater, they can also breathe air and can survive indefinitely on land.
Blunt Weapon Immunity (Ex): An ocean giant takes no
damage from bludgeoning weapons.
Cold Subtype (Ex): An ocean giant is immune to cold
damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the giant takes
half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Landform (Su): This ability allows an ocean giant to
assume the form of a Huge humanoid-shaped giant or return
to its natural form at will. An ocean giant in landform is able
to walk on land, but it has no tail attack. A change wrought by
landform cannot be dispelled, nor does the ocean giant revert
to its natural form when killed. A true seeing spell, however,
reveals the ocean giant’s natural shape if it is in landform.
Ocean Giant Society
Ocean giants live in magnificent, underwater mansions situated near barrier reefs. They live off the sea, hunting large sea
creatures and harvesting aquatic plants and shellfish. Elderly
ocean giants often raise domestic animals on deserted islands
GIANT
Ocean Giant Mountain Giant
Huge Giant (Cold, Aquatic) Colossal Giant (Earth)
Hit Dice: 18d8+162 (243 hp) 30d8+390 (525 hp)
Initiative: +6 +0
Speed: 40 ft., swim 80 ft. 80 ft.
AC: 26 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +16 natural), 31 (–8 size, +29 natural),
touch 10, flat-footed 24 touch 2, flat-footed 31
Attacks: Gargantuan trident +25/+20/+15 melee and tail Mountain giant club +30/+25/+20/+15 melee,
slap +20 melee, or 2 slams +25 melee and tail slap or 2 slams +30 melee, or rock +15 ranged
+20 melee, or rock +14 ranged
Damage: Gargantuan trident 4d6+21, slam 1d6+14, Mountain giant club 4d8+24/19–20, slam
tail slap 1d10+7, rock 2d8+14 2d6+16, rock 4d8+16
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft. 40 ft. by 40 ft./25 ft.
Special Attacks: Rock throwing Crush 2d6+24, fling, grapple, rock throwing,
trample 4d6+24
Special Qualities: Amphibious, blunt weapon immunity, cold subtype, Darkvision 60 ft., rock catching, scent,
darkvision 60 ft., landform, rock catching summon giants
Saves: Fort +20, Ref +8, Will +8 Fort +30, Ref +10, Will +10
Abilities: Str 39, Dex 15, Con 28, Int 11, Wis 14, Cha 18 Str 43, Dex 10, Con 37, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 7
Skills: Diplomacy +6, Listen+8, Sense Motive +8, Spot +10, Jump +18, Listen +16, Spot +16
Swim +22
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Far Shot, Improved Initiative, Alertness, Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Great
Point Blank Shot Cleave, Improved Critical (mountain giant
club), Power Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic Any mountains
Organization: Solitary, pair, or family (3–8 plus 1–4 noncombatants Solitary or family (2 plus 1–3 noncombatants)
plus 1 7th–10th level cleric or sorcerer and 2–8
sea lions)
Challenge Rating: 19 26
Treasure: Double standard Standard
Alignment: Usually good Usually chaotic
Advancement: By character class By character classto supplement their clans’ diet. Many young ocean giants
desire to travel the seas aboard sailing ships, so they sign up
to become sailors. Of course, their incredible size limits
them to only the largest vessels. Merfolk and aquatic storm
giants view ocean giants as plunderers of the sea’s wealth, so
relations between them are strained at best.
Ocean Giant Characters
An ocean giant’s favored class is sorcerer, but
many also choose to become clerics. An ocean
giant cleric can choose two of the following
domains: Luck, Protection, and Water.
An ocean giant PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 23; thus, a 1stlevel ocean giant sorcerer has an ECL of 24 and
is the equivalent of a 24th-level character.
MOUNTAIN GIANT
Among the largest giants in existence, mountain giants are primitive creatures given to
cruelty and capriciousness. They take great
pleasure in flinging boulders down upon
passing smaller creatures, trying to hit
them as they flee. Mountain giants often live
to be 100 years old.
A mountain giant resembles a titanic hill giant, standing
more than 40 feet tall and weighing nearly 50,000 pounds.
Greasy, jet-black hair frames a face with bulbous features
and a skin tone that can be any shade from tan to reddish
brown. The typical mountain giant wears only minimal
clothing—usually a breechcloth and a shirt made of
rough animal hide that barely covers a large
pot belly.
A mountain giant’s bag contains 3d4 rocks,
1d4+2 mundane items, and the giant’s personal
wealth. These items tend to be humanoid
artifacts that the mountain giant considers playthings, such as broken
wagons, small huts, and furniture,
including tables and beds.
Combat
Mountain giants attack in a straightforward manner, stepping forth to
overrun opponents whenever possible. They also enjoy picking up foes
and hurling them against a mountainside. Many an armed foe has
foiled a mountain giant’s initial
grab attempt only to be scooped up
by the monster’s other hand.
In melee, mountain giants use their
height to smash their clubs down on the heads
of their foes. A mountain giant that feels seriously threatened often uses its summon giants ability to engage its foes
with other opponents, then steps back to hurl boulders.
Against groups of smaller foes, mountain giants prefer
their trample or crush attacks.
Crush (Ex): A mountain giant that jumps at least
20 feet into the air (or jumps down from a height of at
least 20 feet) can land on opponents two or more
size categories smaller than itself as a
standard action, using its whole
body to crush them. A crush
attack affects as many creatures as
can fit under the giant’s body.
(This is normally a 40-foot
square, but the giant can instead
opt to come down on its seat and
cover a 40-foot by 60-foot area.) Each
creature in the affected area
must succeed at a Reflex
save (DC 38) or be pinned,
automatically taking 2d6+24
points of bludgeoning damage.
Thereafter, if the giant chooses
to maintain the pin, treat it as a
normal grapple attack. While
pinned, the opponent takes
crush damage each round.
Fling (Ex): A mountain giant that sucessfully grapples a foe
two or more size categories smaller than itself can hurl the
creature as a standard action. A flung creature travels up to 120
feet and takes 12d6 points of damage. A creature that is flung
off a mountain takes this amount of damage or the appropriate
falling damage, whichever is greater. The giant also can throw
the flung creature as though it were a boulder. In this case,
the flung creature takes 12d6+16 points of damage, and any
opponent it strikes takes 4d8+16 points of damage.
Grapple (Ex): If a mountain giant hits
an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a slam
(used as a melee touch attack), it
deals normal damage and attempts to
start a grapple (grapple bonus +54). If it
gets a hold, it can fling the opponent in
the next round. Alternatively, the mountain giant has the option to conduct
the grapple normally, or simply use
one hand to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the
mountain giant is not considered
grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action
during its turn each round, a mountain
giant can trample opponents at least
one size category smaller than itself. This attack
113
GIANT114
deals 4d6+24 points of bludgeoning damage. A trampled
opponent can attempt either an attack of opportunity at a –4
penalty or a Reflex save (DC 41) for half damage.
Scent (Ex): A mountain giant can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Summon Giants (Sp): Once per day, a mountain giant can
attempt to summon 1d8+1 ogres, 1d6+1 trolls, or 1d4+1 hill
giants with a 25% chance of success.
Skills and Feats: A mountain giant has EHD as though it
were a Huge creature.
Mountain Giant Society
Mountain giants live largely solitary lives in desolate mountain ranges and volcanic peaks. Though most of them resent
intruders, some like to keep a few dwarves and humans as
pets. When more than one mountain giant is encountered,
it is usually a mated pair with children.
Mountain Giant Characters
A mountain giant’s favored class is barbarian, though the
cleric class is also popular among the race. Mountain giant
clerics can choose any two of the following domains: Earth,
Strength, and Trickery.
A mountain giant PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 25. Thus, a 1st-level
mountain giant barbarian has an ECL of 26 and is
the equivalent of a 26th-level character.
GLIMMERSKIN
Medium-Size Outsider (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 12d8+24 (78 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: Fly 50 ft. (perfect)
AC: 14 (+1 Dex, +3 deflection), touch
14, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Energy touch +13
Damage: Energy touch
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Energy touch
Special Qualities: DR 5/+1, heroic bond, incorporeal
subtype, outsider traits, plane shift, SR 15, telepathy
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +9, Will +10
Abilities: Str —, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 11, Wis 15, Cha 16
Skills: Bluff +17, Diplomacy +16, Intimidate +5,
Knowledge (arcana) +14, Knowledge (the planes)
+14, Search +15, Sense Motive +17, Spot +17
Feats: Cleave, Great Cleave, Power Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 8
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
Glimmerskins are thrill-seeking parasites from the Positive
Energy Plane. These creatures travel to the Material Plane
solely to engage in mortal combat.
Since a glimmerskin lacks a material form, it cannot
engage an opponent in physical melee unaided. To circumvent this difficulty, it solicits a willing host to harbor it. In
exchange for this service, the glimmerskin temporarily
grants the host augmented fighting skills and abilities.
A glimmerskin appears as a vaguely humanoid-shaped
being made of pulsing white light. Despite its alien appearance, it possesses a recognizably intelligent, elflike face.
When bonded with a host, a glimmerskin cosmetically
alters its shape to one more appropriate for battle, usually
appearing as a full suit of radiant armor or a glowing, hooded
robe. A glimmerskin envelops only its host’s body; it cannot
cover the latter’s shield or drawn weapons.
When on the Material Plane, glimmerskins usually seek
out large-scale battles, since these offer a greater variety of
potential hosts. The creature is not concerned with alignment, nor is it interested in its host’s intentions, nor does it
care whether its host lives or dies—it desires only combat.
A glimmerskin can remain away from the Positive Energy Plane for a number of hours equal
to half its Constitution score. Each round that
it exceeds this limit, it must make a Fortitude
save (DC 20) or die from energy dispersion.
This danger keeps most glimmerskins
from making frequent trips to the
Material Plane.
Some enterprising adventurers who are
familiar with the planes and aware of the
glimmerskins’ limited time frames arrange
one-time “bondings” between glimmerskins and willing hosts. This often occurs
during times of war and similar unrest, but
bondings also occur between glimmerskins
and adventurers seeking some extra power for
an upcoming confrontation. Whoever arranges
such a bonding first determines what physical
challenges the host expects to meet, then apprises
the glimmerskin of the offer and selects a time and
place for the bonding. The host usually pays the
arranger a stipend (or “finder’s fee”)
ahead of time for this service.
Combat
Glimmerskins revel in combat, but
they cannot actually control their
hosts. Instead, they communicate their wishes telepathically, acting as combat advisors. A host who ignores a glimmerskin’s requests risks termination of the bond, since the
monster is quite willing to abandon a host in favor of a
more accommodating or interesting one. Before abandoning a host, a glimmerskin usually contacts its next prospect
via telepathy to arrange a transfer. If badly wounded, a
GLIMMERSKINglimmerskin escapes to the Positive Energy Plane rather
than continuing to fight.
Energy Touch (Su): The positively energized touch of a
glimmerskin heals a target of 5 points of damage per round
or grants 5 additional temporary hit points per round to a
creature already at full hit points. These temporary hit
points fade 1d6 rounds after the creature ceases physical
contact with the glimmerskin. However, this benefit has an
unfortunate side effect. For each round that its hit points
(including temporary ones) exceed its normal hit point
total, the target creature must make a successful Fortitude
save (DC 19) or explode in a 20-foot burst of radiant energy.
Each creature caught in the blast (including the target) takes
damage equal to 2d6 points + the number of excess hit
points the target had at the time. A Reflex save (DC 19)
reduces the damage by half. A glimmerskin’s host automatically benefits from the additional hit points but is allowed
no saving throw to reduce the damage from the blast. Glimmerskins rarely inform their hosts of this side effect.
Heroic Bond (Su): A glimmerskin bonds by enveloping
its host. A bonded host gains a +4 bonus on melee attack
rolls, a +2 armor bonus to AC, access to the glimmerskin’s
feats (with the prerequisite Strength score of at least 13),
and any class features the glimmerskin may have. Additionally, a host who can turn undead gains a +5 bonus on the roll
to determine Hit Dice affected. In exchange, the host shares
half of any earned experience points with the glimmerskin.
Spells that protect against Positive Energy Plane effects prevent a glimmerskin from bonding to a host.
Incorporeal Subtype: A glimmerskin can be harmed
only by other incorporeal creatures, +1 or better magic
weapons, spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. The creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage
from a corporeal source, except for force effects or attacks
made with ghost touch weapons. A glimmerskin can pass
through solid objects, but not force effects, at will. Its
attacks ignore natural armor, armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and force effects work normally against them.
A glimmerskin always moves silently and cannot be heard
with Listen checks if it doesn’t wish to be.
Outsider Traits: A glimmerskin has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Plane Shift (Sp): A glimmerskin can use plane shift at will
(caster level 12th; Will save DC 18).
Telepathy (Su): A glimmerskin can communicate telepathically with any creature within 100 feet that has a language.
Feats: A glimmerskin’s feats become usable only when
the creature is bonded with a host who has a Strength score
of at least 13.
GLIMMERSKIN CHARACTERS
A glimmerskin’s favored class is fighter.
A glimmerskin PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal
to its class level + 15. Thus, a 1st-level glimmerskin fighter has
an ECL of 16 and is the equivalent of a 16th-level character.
GOLEM
Golems are magically created constructs of great power.
Constructing one involves the use of mighty magic and elemental forces. The animating force for a golem is a spirit
from the Elemental Plane of Earth. The process of creation
binds the unwilling spirit to the artificial body and subjects
it to the will of the golem’s creator.
Golems have no language of their own, but they can
understand simple instructions from their creators.
COMBAT
Golems are tenacious in combat. Since they are mindless,
they can do nothing in the absence of orders from their creators. They always follow instructions explicitly and are
incapable of any strategy or tactics. They are emotionless in
combat and cannot be provoked.
If a golem’s creator is within 60 feet of it and both visible
and audible to it, he or she can command the creature directly.
An uncommanded golem usually follows its last instruction
to the best of its ability, though it returns any attacks made
against it. The creator can give the golem a simple program
(such as “Remain in an area and attack all creatures [or creatures of a specific type] that enter,” or “Ring a gong and
attack,” or the like) to govern its actions in his or her absence.
Since golems do not need to breathe and are immune to
most forms of energy, they can press an attack against an
opponent almost anywhere, from the bottom of the sea to
the frigid top of the tallest mountain.
Construct Traits: A golem is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects,
necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a Fortitude
save unless it also works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. It cannot
heal itself but can be healed through repair. It cannot be
raised or resurrected. A golem has darkvision (60-foot range).
Magic Immunity (Ex): Golems completely resist most
magical and supernatural effects, except as noted below.
CONSTRUCTION
The cost given for each golem includes the price of the
physical body, plus all the materials and spell components
that are consumed during the process or become a permanent part of the golem.
The first task is carving or assembling the golem’s physical body. The creator can do this personally or hire someone
else to do the job. The builder must have the requisite skill,
which varies with the golem. The real work of creation
involves extended magical rituals requiring two months to
complete. Understanding the rituals requires a character of
the appropriate level with the Craft Magic Arms and Armor
and Craft Wondrous Item feats. The creator must labor for at
least 8 hours each day in a specially prepared laboratory or
workroom. This chamber is similar to an alchemist’s laboratory and costs 500 gp to establish.
115
GOLEM116
When not working on the rituals, the creator must rest
and can perform no other activities except eating, sleeping,
or talking. If personally constructing the golem’s body, the
creator can perform the building and the rituals together.
Missing a day of rituals means the process fails and must be
started again. Any money spent is lost, but XP are not. The
golem’s body can be reused, as can the laboratory.
Completing the ritual drains the appropriate XP from the
creator and requires casting any spells on the final day. The
creator must cast the spells personally, but they can come
from outside sources, such as scrolls.
STAINED GLASS GOLEM
Beautiful stained glass windows not only indicate the
wealth of a temple or stronghold, they may also be the site’s
guardians. These beautiful constructs are built to harmonize
with a structure’s decor so that their presence is not obvious
to any except intruders.
Stained glass golems are flat, two-dimensional replicas
of living beings. When they move, they produce a tinkling
sound like that made by delicate crystal wind chimes.
When moving through a lighted area, they flash and
flicker as the light striking them breaks down into its
component hues. Stained glass golems never communicate in any way.
Combat
Stained glass golems attack by slashing with their “arms,”
which are as sharp as broken glass.
Keen (Su): A stained glass golem’s rake attack threatens a
critical hit on a natural attack roll of 19–20.
Magic Immunity (Ex): A stained glass golem is immune
to all spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects,
except as follows. A shatter spell affects it normally. A mending spell heals 2d6 points of damage the golem has taken.
Sonic attacks affect it normally.
Skills: *A stained glass golem receives a +20 competence
bonus on Hide checks when standing motionless in a
window frame.
Construction
A stained glass golem’s body is constructed from 50
pounds of glass shards and costs 10,000 gp to create.
Assembling the body requires a successful Craft (glassmaking) check (DC 25).
The creator must be 16th level and able to cast arcane
spells. Completing the ritual drains 200 XP from the creator
and requires the geas/quest, limited wish, and polymorph any
object spells.
GOLEM
Stained Glass Golem Brass Golem Dragonflesh Golem
Medium-Size Construct Large Construct Large Construct
Hit Dice: 12d10 (66 hp) 16d10 (88 hp) 30d10 (165 hp)
Initiative: +0 +0 +0
Speed: 30 ft. (can’t run) 30 ft. (can’t run) 40 ft. (can’t run), fly 120 ft. (poor)
AC: 15 (+5 natural), touch 10, 31 (–1 size, +22 natural), 23 (–1 size, +14 natural),
flat-footed 15 touch 9, flat-footed 31 touch 9, flat-footed 23
Attacks: 2 rakes +10 melee Huge +3 wounding greataxe Bite +27 melee and 2 claws +22
+19/+14/+9 melee, or butt +16 melee and 2 wings +22 melee
melee and tail slap +22 melee
Damage: Rake 1d8+1/19–20 Huge +3 wounding greataxe Bite 2d6+6, claw 1d8+3,
2d8+10/×3, butt 1d8+7 wing 1d6+3, tail slap 1d8+9
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: — Maze Frightful presence
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 10/+2, Construct traits, DR 15/+3, Blindsight 150 ft., construct
fast healing 5, keen, magic magic immunity, scent traits, DR 15/+3, magic
immunity immunity
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +5 Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +7 Fort +10, Ref +10, Will +13
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 10, Con —, Str 20, Dex 11, Con —, Str 22, Dex 11, Con —,
Int 4, Wis 13, Cha 7 Int 3, Wis 14, Cha 7 Int 4, Wis 17, Cha 17
Skills: Hide +0* Wilderness Lore +2* —
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or crew (3–5) Solitary Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5 10 13
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 13–24 HD (Medium-size); 17–32 HD (Large); 31–60 HD (Large);
25–36 HD (Large) 33–48 HD (Huge) 61–90 HD (Huge)BRASS GOLEM
A brass golem exists to fulfill one goal, set at the time of its
creation. It waits with absolute patience until activated,
then it becomes a terrible instrument of destruction. If its
goal becomes unattainable—for example, if it was created
to guard a temple that no longer exists—the brass golem
loses its enchantment entirely and becomes nothing more
than a statue.
A brass golem is most often forged to resemble a minotaur. Until activated, it appears as a large, brass statue armed
with a gleaming greataxe.
Combat
A brass golem fights primarily with its greataxe.
Maze (Sp): Once per day, a brass golem can target a maze
effect (caster level 16th) against a single quarry. The golem
is immune to the effects of its own maze ability and that of
others of its kind, and it can freely enter its own maze to
track a target.
Magic Immunity (Ex): A brass golem is immune to all
spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects, except as
follows. An electricity effect slows it (as the slow spell) for 3
rounds, with no saving throw. A fire effect breaks any slow
effect on the golem and cures 1 point of damage for each 3
points of damage it would otherwise deal. (For example, a
brass golem hit by a fireball cast by a 5th-level wizard gains
back 6 hit points if the damage total is 18.) The golem does
not get a saving throw against fire effects.
Skills: *A brass golem is a relentless tracker. It gains a +20
competence bonus on Wilderness Lore checks for the purpose of tracking a foe designated by its creator, or in connection with any other goal set by its creator. When tracking a foe through its own maze, the creature gains a +20
insight bonus on Wilderness Lore checks.
Construction
A brass golem’s body is constructed from 1,000 pounds of
brass and costs 200,000 gp to create. (This amount includes
1,500 gp for the body and 32,320 gp
for the +3 wounding greataxe.)
Assembling the body requires
one successful Craft
( a r m o r s m i t h i n g )
check (DC 25) and
one successful Craft
(weaponsmithing)
check (DC 25).
The creator must
be 16th level and able
to cast arcane spells.
Completing the ritual drains 4,000 XP
from the creator and
requires the geas/
quest, limited wish,
maze, Mordenkainen’s
sword, and polymorph any object spells.
DRAGONFLESH GOLEM
Dragonflesh golems, sometimes called drolems, are built
from parts of dragons. These creatures can remember more
complex commands than most golems can, but because they
cannot think, they obey commands to the letter rather than
evaluating the intent. Drolems have been known to kill
their creators because a complex or incautiously worded
command allowed such an option for fulfillment.
True dragons hate dragonflesh golems and attack them on
sight. Once a dragon has slain a drolem, it hunts down the
creator as well, to exact retribution for the atrocities committed against dragonkind in creating such a creature.
The dragonflesh golem is a hideous patchwork of rotting,
mismatched dragon parts rudely stitched together. Despite its
appearance, a dragonflesh golem is a construct, not an undead.
Combat
A drolem lacks the breath weapons and the spellcasting abilities of true dragons. It usually prefers to land in the midst of
a group of opponents and lash out in all directions with its
teeth, claws, wings, and tail.
Frightful Presence (Ex): When a drolem charges,
attacks, or flies overhead, it inspires terror in all creatures
within 30 feet that have fewer Hit Dice or levels than it has.
Each potentially affected opponent must succeed at a Will
save (DC 28) or become shaken for 5d6 rounds. A successful
save leaves that opponent immune to that drolem’s frightful
presence for 24 hours.
Blindsight (Ex): A drolem can ascertain its surroundings
by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and scent, but also by
noticing vibrations and other environmental clues). This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 150 feet.
117
GOLEM118
The drolem usually does not need to make Spot or Listen
checks to notice creatures within range of its blindsight.
Magic Immunity (Ex): A drolem is immune to all spells,
spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects, except as follows.
Fire- and cold-based effects slow the monster (as the slow spell)
for 2d6 rounds, with no saving throw. An electricity effect
breaks any slow effect on the drolem and cures 1 point of
damage for each 3 points of damage it would otherwise deal.
For example, a drolem hit by a lightning bolt cast by a 5th-level
wizard gains back 6 hit points if the damage total is 18. The
drolem does not get a saving throw against electricity effects.
Construction
A drolem’s body is constructed from either an entire dragon
corpse, or enough parts of dragon corpses to assemble a
whole dragon.
The drolem costs 200,000 gp to create. Assembling the
body requires one successful Knowledge (nature) check and
one successful Heal check (both DC 25).
The creator must be 16th level and able to cast arcane
spells. Completing the ritual drains 4,000 XP from the creator and requires the geas/quest, limited wish, and polymorph
any object spells.
GRAVECRAWLER
Small Undead (Earth)
Hit Dice: 25d12 (162 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 20 ft., burrow 20 ft.
AC: 17 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Bite +13
Damage: Bite 1d4/19–20 plus 1d4 Constitution drain
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Calcifying aura, Constitution drain
Special Qualities: Burrow, speak with dead, SR 30,
tremorsense, turn resistance +6, undead traits
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +16
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 15, Con —, Int 16, Wis 11, Cha 11
Skills: Balance +4, Bluff +5, Diplomacy +12, Escape
Artist +10, Hide +21, Intimidate +2, Jump +2,
Knowledge (history) +20, Knowledge (local)
+20, Knowledge (undead) +20, Listen +7,
Sense Motive +5, Spot +2, Tumble +7
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat
Reflexes, Dodge, Improved Critical (bite),
Iron Will, Mobility, Skill Focus
(Knowledge [history]), Skill Focus
(Knowledge [local]), Skill Focus
(Knowledge [undead])
Climate/Terrain: Any land and
underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang
(3–4)
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 26–52 HD (Medium-size)
The gravecrawler, sometimes called the ancestor worm, is
an intelligent, sluglike undead with the power to turn flesh
(dead or living) to stone. Gravecrawlers can be found in
wilderness areas, but they are most often found in cemeteries, boneyards, and necropoli. There they slowly turn the
surrounding dead bodies to a brittle stone that cannot be
animated even by the animate dead spell.
A gravecralwer resembles a bloated, pale, segmented
worm about 3 feet in length. Its face looks like that of a
human or humanoid, except that it has no eyes—not even
vestigial ones.
Gravecrawlers can communicate with the spirits of the
dead they consume, and as such they often become repositories of local lore, history, and gossip. Because of this fact,
some societies view gravecrawlers as beneficial creatures.
Even those who consider them benefactors, however, tend
to give their lairs a wide berth, since the presence of these
creatures has a grievous effects on the living. Gravecrawlers
are frequently sought out by those who seek hidden knowledge and lost bits of history, but they are hated both by
necromancers and by corpse-devouring creatures such as
the ghoul and the corpse gatherer.
COMBAT
Gravecrawlers would rather be venerated than fought. If seriously threatened, they usually try to flee below ground. Occasionally, a gravecrawler may try
to ambush
GRAVECRAWLERits opponents, erupting from the ground to expose a whole
group of intruders to its calcifying aura, then following up
with its debilitating bite. Gravecrawlers tend to be more forgiving if propitiated with fresh bodies and uncalcified bones.
Calcifying Aura (Su): The presence of a gravecrawler is
enough to cause flesh (living or dead) to harden and calcify,
turning slowly into stone. This effect is a 30-foot-radius emanation centered on the gravecrawler, and it is always active. Every
creature within the area must make a Fortitude save (DC 22)
each round or take 1d2 points of Constitution damage. (Unlike
the drain from its bite, the loss from the gravecrawler’s calcifying aura is restored at the rate of 1 point per day.) A character
brought to a Constitution score of 0 in this manner turns completely to stone. A gravecrawler is immune to its own calcifying aura and to those of others of its kind.
Constitution Drain (Su): Any creature bitten by a gravecrawler must make a Fortitude save (DC 22) or permanently
lose 1d4 points of Constitution (or twice that amount on a
critical hit). The gravecrawler heals 5 points of damage (10
on a critical hit) whenever it drains Constitution, gaining
any excess as temporary hit points. A creature affected by
this Constitution drain finds parts of its flesh turned to
hard, brittle stone. At 0 Constitution, the target becomes a
stone statue. A gravecrawler is immune to its own Constitution drain and to those of others of its kind.
Burrow (Ex): Gravecrawlers can move through stone,
dirt, and earth, leaving no indication of their passage. A move
earth spell cast on an area containing a burrowing gravecrawler flings the creature back 30 feet and stuns it for 1
round, unless it succeeds at a Fortitude save (DC 22).
Speak with Dead (Su): At will, a gravecrawler can produce
an effect like that of a speak with dead spell (caster level 20th),
except that it can be used to communicate with only
one corpse per week. This ability does not allow
communication with calcified remains.
Tremorsense (Ex): A gravecrawler can
automatically sense the location of anything
within 60 feet that is in contact with the
ground.
Turn Resistance (Ex): A gravecrawler is treated as an undead with 31
Hit Dice for the purpose of turn, rebuke,
command, and bolster attempts.
Undead Traits: A gravecrawler is immune
to mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep,
paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromantic effects, and any
effect that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects. It is not
subject to critical hits, subdual damage,
ability damage, ability drain, energy drain,
or death from massive damage. A gravecrawler cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision
(60-foot range).
GRAVORG
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+30 (85 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 13 (–1 size, –1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 2 claws +13 melee and bite +8 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+4, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Reverse gravity
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 5/+1, low-light
vision, SR 19
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +4
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 8, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +16, Hide +9*, Listen +5, Spot +5
Feats: Ability Focus (reverse gravity), Alertness, Improved
Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 8
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–20 HD (Huge);
21–25 HD (Gargantuan); 26–30 HD (Colossal)
A gravorg is a carnivorous predator that lairs underground.
These monsters are only rarely encountered in the wilderness; they tend to move from cave to cave or dungeon to dungeon in search of prey. The sound of armor and flesh repeatedly striking stone often means that a gravorg has found
another victim. The beast is so voracious that
the remnants of such an encounter
may be nothing more
than piles of bones and
equipment strewn
haphazardly over
a dungeon
f l o o r .
119
GRAVORG
RGM120
A gravorg is a 10-foot-long, four-legged animal that
vaguely resembles a sloth. Its fur is a mixture of white, gray,
and black hairs. This coloration makes it look like a lump of
stone when motionless.
COMBAT
A gravorg uses reverse gravity to bounce its prey off ceilings
or other overhangs, then dismisses the effect to drop the
opponents back to the floor. Only when its victims appear
unconscious or dead does a gravorg come out of hiding and
begin to feed.
A gravorg caught outdoors uses its reverse gravity ability to
throw predators in the air repeatedly until the latter either
flee or become disabled. The monster uses its claws and
teeth almost entirely for tearing open its prey rather than
for self-defense.
Reverse Gravity (Sp): At will, a gravorg can produce
an effect like that of a reverse gravity spell (caster
level 10th; Reflex save DC 18), except that the
range is 200 feet and it affects an area of up
to five 10-foot cubes. The monster simply
stacks the cubes to reach a ceiling or
other overhang, then uses any
remaining area to disrupt the prey’s
companions.
Skills: *A gravorg receives a +10 bonus
on Hide checks in subterranean areas.
GREENVISE
Huge Plant
Hit Dice: 12d8+48 (102 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 10 ft.
AC: 16 (–2 size, +8 natural), touch 8,
flat-footed 16
Attacks: 4 slams +16 melee and bite
+11 melee
Damage: Slam 2d4+9, bite 1d6+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Death fog,
improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Acid immunity,
plant traits, woodsense
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +4, Will +4
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 10, Con 18, Int 3, Wis 11, Cha 6
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm hills, plains or
marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, or patch (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 13–18 HD (Huge); 19–36 HD
(Gargantuan)
Greenvises are ambulatory vegetable horrors that stalk the
fringes of some humanoid settlements. These carnivorous
plants are not bold—they prefer to ambush lone prey that
happens to come too near. Greenvises rest at night and
actively hunt during daylight hours, repositioning themselves throughout the day if prey in a particular hunting
area proves scarce.
A greenvise is a larger, sturdier version of the venus flytrap, with a thick, green, trunklike stem and four sturdy
tendrils that hang down like vines. When the creature
opens its mouth, a mottled pink maw lined with toothlike
thorns is revealed; when closed, the mouth structure
resembles an ordinary leafy bush. A greenvise has small,
tendrillike roots that it uses to move.
COMBAT
After setting itself up in an appropriate location, a greenvise lies in wait for
prey to pass. It lunges at the first living
creature it senses, using all its tendrils to grab the prey and transfer it
to its maw. An extremely hungry or seriously hurt greenvise releases a death fog to
weaken its opponents and obscure their vision. Although
multiple greenvises are
sometimes found together, they do not share
their prey and thus do
not assist each other in
combat unless many
potential victims are
present.
Death Fog (Su):
Twice per day, a greenvise can emit an acidic
fog that functions like
an acid fog spell,
except as follows.
The death fog’s
area is a 40-foothigh spread with a
60-foot radius. Within this area, all
sight, including darkvision, is limited to
5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has onehalf concealment (attacks against it have a
20% miss chance). Creatures farther away have total concealment (50% miss chance, and the attacker can’t use
sight to locate the target). Any creature attempting to
move through the death fog progresses at one -tenth
normal speed, and each of its melee attack and melee
damage rolls incurs a –2 circumstance penalty. A death
fog prevents effective ranged weapon attacks, except for
magic rays and the like.
GREENVISE
RGMIn addition to obscuring sight, a death fog is highly
acidic. Each round, the fog deals 3d8 points of acid damage
to every creature and object within it (no saving throw). A
severe wind (31+ mph) disperses these vapors in 1d2
rounds; otherwise, the effect lasts for 3d6+1 rounds. The
greenvise is not impeded by its own death fog, so it can
move and fight within the fog freely.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a greenvise hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +26). If it gets a hold, it can
transfer the opponent to its maw with another successful
grapple check, dealing automatic bite damage, then try to
swallow in the next round. Alternatively, the greenvise
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its tendrils or maw to hold the opponent (–20 penalty
on grapple check, but the greenvise is not considered
grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it
makes during successive rounds automatically deals slam
or bite damage, as appropriate.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A greenvise can swallow a single
creature that is at least one size category smaller than itself
by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +26),
provided it already has that opponent in its maw (see
Improved Grab, above). Once inside the greenvise, the
opponent takes 2d6+9 points of bludgeoning damage
and 2d4 points of acid damage per round from the
plant’s stomach. A successful grapple check allows
the swallowed creature to climb out of the stomach and return to the greenvise’s maw,
where another successful grapple check is
needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out
with either claws or a light piercing or
slashing weapon. Dealing at least
20 points of damage to the stomach (AC 18) in this way creates an
opening large enough to permit escape.
Once a single swallowed creature exits,
muscular action closes the hole; thus, another
swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A
greenvise’s stomach can hold 1 Large, 4 Medium-size,
16 Small, or 64 Tiny or smaller opponents.
Plant Traits (Ex): A greenvise is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or mindaffecting effects. The creature also has lowlight vision.
Woodsense (Ex): A greenvise can automatically sense the location of anything within
60 feet that is in contact with vegetation, even objects or creatures that are
not in contact with the same vegetation as it is.
GRELL
Medium-Size Aberration
Hit Dice: 5d8+10 (32 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 5 ft., fly 30 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 10 tentacles +4 melee and bite –1 melee
Damage: Tentacle 1d4+1 plus paralyzation, bite 2d4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. (10 ft. with tentacle)
Special Attacks: Improved grab, paralysis
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., flight, immunities,
tentacle regeneration
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +4
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 9
Skills: Hide +12, Listen +4, Move Silently +12, Spot +8
Feats: Flyby Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or pack (3–7)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: 6–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–15 HD (Large)
These horrible, misshapen creatures resemble giant, floating brains with tentacles. They inhabit dungeons, underground passages, remote caves, and other places
where light never reaches. Humanoids of all
kinds are their favorite prey.
This vicious predator has a large, bulbous body composed of wrinkled, light
gray flesh that seems to float in the air
of its own volition. Ten long, spiny tentacles hang from the bottom of its
body, twisting in the air like ropes. A
grell has a sharp beak that it uses for tearing the flesh of its prey, but no other visible
facial features.
COMBAT
A grell prefers to wait in ambush for
potential prey. When a suitable target
passes, the monster attempts to paralyze it with its tentacles, then escape to
its lair with its helpless prey. Grells are
cunning enough to avoid direct confrontations with large groups, since
they are aware of the dangers that foes
capable of teamwork can present.
A grell occasionally shadows a
group that is too large to attack
directly, following along inconspicuously and using its Hide skill
to stay out of sight. When a member
of the target group lags behind, or
121
GRELL
LGW122
the group is distracted by some other hazard, the grell
attacks a straggler and tries to drag away its meal unnoticed.
Grells also sometimes lurk near dangerous areas, such as pit
traps, quicksand, or the lairs of other monsters, hoping to
prey upon trapped, helpless, or wounded creatures.
In melee combat, a grell can attack as many foes as it can
reach, using as many of its tentacles as it wishes against any
single opponent. It uses its bite only against paralyzed prey
or as a last resort.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a grell hits an opponent that is
at least one size category smaller than itself with a tentacle
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +20, including a +16 racial
bonus on grapple checks). If it gets a hold, it has the option
to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use a single tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the grell is not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals tentacle damage.
Paralysis (Ex): A grell’s tentacles are lined with small
spiny barbs, much like a squid’s. (This is clearly a classic
case of convergent evolution, since the two creatures are
completely unrelated.) Any creature hit by a grell’s tentacle must make a Fortitude save (DC 14) or be paralyzed for
4 rounds.
Blindsight (Ex): A grell is blind, but it maneuvers and
fights as well as a sighted creature by using scent
and vibration to ascertain its surroundings.
This ability enables it to discern objects and
creatures within 60 feet. The grell usually
does not need to make Spot or Listen
checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Flight (Ex): A grell’s body is unusually
buoyant. The creature continuously produces
an effect like that of the fly spell, which it can use
to move at a speed of 30 feet (perfect maneuverability). This buoyancy also grants the grell a permanent feather fall effect with personal range.
Immunities (Ex): A grell is immune to electricity and paralysis effects.
Tentacle Regeneration (Ex): Foes can
attack a grell’s tentacles, but only when those
appendages are actually holding an opponent. A tentacle has an AC of 19 (touch 12)
and can withstand 10 points of damage.
The loss of a tentacle does not harm the
creature (that is, the damage does not
apply against its hit point total), and it
regrows the limb within a day.
Skills: A grell gains a +2 racial
bonus on Hide and Move
Silently checks.
GRIMALKIN
Medium-Size Shapechanger
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 12 (+1 Dex, +1 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 claws +2 melee and bite –3 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4–1, bite 1d6–1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., empathy, polymorph
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +5
Abilities: Str 9, Dex 12, Con 11, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 12
Skills: Climb +6, Hide +3, Jump +6, Listen +3, Move
Silently +8, Spot +3
Feats: Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Temperate plains
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size); 9–12 HD
(Large)
Prized pets and dedicated guard animals, the shapeshifting
grimalkins are found among many civilized societies. Most
of these unusual creatures are domesticated, so it is rare to
see one in the wild.
The mutable nature of the grimalkin allows it to take on
a wide variety of animal forms, though its preferred form
is its natural one—that
of an oversized, blue -
gray housecat. When it
is feeling playful, a grimalkin performs for its
master by changing into
amusing or beguiling
forms. It adopts a more
threatening form when
defending itself from
an attack.
A grimalkin bonds
with one master and
remains his or her loyal
companion for life. Its
personality is extremely
malleable, and over time
the grimalkin takes on a
disposition similar to
that of its owner.
Grimalkins speak
Common. They are
chatty creatures that
never know when to
keep quiet.
GRIMALKIN
DCCOMBAT
A grimalkin changes its shape each round
during a battle to confuse its foes. This makes it
very difficult to adopt any sort of strategy for
fighting it. A grimalkin fights to the death
when defending its master, though it is
quite willing to flee a battle that is going
badly for it while it is alone.
Empathy (Ex): A grimalkin can detect
the surface emotions of any creature within
50 feet that it can see. It can sense basic
needs, drives, and emotions, but not thoughts.
A successful Will save (DC 13) allows a target
to avoid being sensed in this way by that
grimalkin for 24 hours thereafter.
Polymorph (Su): As a free action, a
grimalkin can produce an effect like
that of a polymorph self spell, except as
follows. The creature may take the
form of any Medium-size or smaller
animal, beast, or vermin, but it does not
regain hit points when changing forms.
Skills: A grimalkin has a +4 racial bonus on Move Silently
checks and a +2 racial bonus on Climb and Jump checks.
GRIZZLY MASTODON
Huge Beast
Hit Dice: 15d10+90 (172 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 16 (–2 size, +8 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Slam +21 melee and 2 stamps +16 melee, or gore
+21 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+12, stamp 2d6+6, gore 4d8+12
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Trample 4d8+18
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +15, Ref +9, Will +7
Abilities: Str 35, Dex 10, Con 23, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 7
Skills: Listen +10, Spot +9
Climate/Terrain: Cold and temperate hills and forests
Organization: Solitary or herd (6–30)
Challenge Rating: 13
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 16–21 HD (Huge); 22–45 HD
(Gargantuan)
These larger, more temperamental cousins of the elephant
roam subarctic and arctic lands. The great strength and
endurance of these tremendous herbivores make them
highly desirable to giants, who capture and tame them for
use as mounts and beasts of burden.
Suspicious and
unfriendly by nature, grizzly
mastodons are highly protective of their young and their
feeding grounds. They never hesitate to drive away intruders, stomping underfoot any who are unwise enough to persist. Grizzly mastodons are among the most aggressive creatures alive when it comes to defending their territories
from other groups of mastodons or large herbivores and
protecting their mates and offspring from predators of all
kinds. More than one hungry creature that thought to
make a meal of a young grizzly mastodon has learned a
harsh lesson at the sharp tusks and stomping feet of several
furious adults.
A grizzly mastodon is a shaggy, elephantine creature covered in gray, brown, or black fur. It is called grizzly because
of the sprinkling of gray hairs throughout its coat, like that
of a grizzly bear. Unlike an elephant, a grizzly mastodon has
two pairs of ivory tusks. The typical adult specimen is 20
feet tall and weighs 22,000 pounds.
COMBAT
In combat, grizzly mastodons gore with their four tusks,
then trample opponents underfoot. They prefer to attack in
groups, but they show no fear even when overmatched if the
safety of their young is at stake.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action, a grizzly mastodon
can trample opponents at least one size category smaller
than itself. This attack deals 4d8+18 points of bludgeoning
damage. A trampled opponent can attempt either an attack
of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC 29) for
half damage.
Scent (Ex): A grizzly mastodon can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
123
GRIZZLY
MASTODON124
HALF-FIEND, DURZAGON
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil, Lawful)
Hit Dice: 5d8+10 (32 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 13 (+2 Dex, +1 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 claws +7 melee and bite +2 melee and beard
+2 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+2, bite 1d6+1, beard 1d3+1 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Beard, poison, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Acid resistance 20, cold resistance 20,
darkvision 120 ft., DR 10/+1, duergar traits, electricity
resistance 20, fire resistance 20, immunities, light
sensitivity, outsider traits, SR 15
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +4
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 14, Con 15, Int 14, Wis 11, Cha 8
Skills: Appraise +10, Diplomacy +3, Listen +11, Move
Silently +14, Search +10, Sense Motive +8, Spot +11
Feats: Alertness (B), Improved Initiative, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary, team (1 plus 2–4 duergar), squad
(1 plus 11–20 duergar), or clan (1 plus 30–100 duergar)
Challenge Rating: 4
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil
Advancement: By character class
A durzagon is the result of
secret crossbreeding between
a devil and an unsuspecting
duergar. From time to time,
powerful devils disguised as
gray dwarves infiltrate duergar
society, seeking out the best
mates to bear durzagon children. Most duergar are unaware
that they have attracted the attention of diabolical forces. The birth
of a half-fiend durzagon is cause
for much celebration in the infernal realms.
A durzagon is slightly taller
and leaner than a gray dwarf, usually reaching a height of about 5 feet.
The half-fiend is bald but sports a wiry,
gray beard tinged with red streaks. Its
rust-colored skin radiates a palpable
heat, and its fingers end in wickedly
sharp claws.
Durzagons speak Dwarf and
Undercommon. Those who
learn of their diabolic ancestry also speak Infernal.
COMBAT
Though durzagons relish physical combat, they usually
prefer to use spell-like abilities from behind the protection
of duergar guards. In melee, durzagons show no fear; they
would rather fight to the death than submit to an enemy.
Beard (Ex): If a durzagon hits a single opponent with
both claw attacks, it automatically hits with its beard as well.
Poison (Ex): A durzagon’s poison (Fortitude save DC 14) is
a sulfuric fluid delivered with each successful beard attack.
The initial damage is 1d4 points of Strength damage, and the
secondary damage is 1d2 points of Strength drain.
Spell-Like Abilities: 3/day—darkness, 1/day—desecrate,
enlarge (self only), invisibility, unholy blight. Caster level 10th;
save DC 9 + spell level.
Duergar Traits: A durzagon gains a +1 bonus on attack
rolls against orcs and goblinoids, a +2 bonus on Will saves
against spells and spell-like abilities, and a +4 dodge bonus against giants. It also has stonecunning (+2 racial bonus
on checks to notice unusual stonework; intuit depth).
Immunities (Ex): A durzagon is immune to paralysis,
phantasms, and poisons.
Light Sensitivity: Exposure to bright light (such as sunlight or a daylight spell) imposes a –2 circumstance penalty
on a durzagon’s attack rolls.
Outsider Traits: A durzagon cannot be raised or resurrected.
Skills: A durzagon gains a +4 racial bonus on Move Silently
checks and a +1 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.
DURZAGON SOCIETY
Durzagons almost always hold leadership positions in duergar society, and a large duergar city may have several
durzagon residents. The gray dwarves revere these
creatures as powerful leaders. Durzagons go to great lengths to keep
the knowledge of their powers a
secret from their enemies and
their allies.
DURZAGON
CHARACTERS
A durzagon’s favored class is
cleric. Like duergar, most
durzagons worship the cruel
dwarven deity, Laduguer.
Durzagon clerics can choose
two of the following domains:
Evil, Law, Magic, and Protection.
A durzagon PC’s effective
character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 7; thus, a 1stlevel durzagon cleric has an
ECL of 8 and is the equivalent of
a 8th-level character.
HALF-FIENDHELLFIRE WYRM
Huge Dragon (Fire)
Hit Dice: 23d12+184 (333 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy)
AC: 36 (–2 size, + 28 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 36
Attacks: Bite +30 melee and 2 claws +25 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+9, claw 2d6+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Breath weapon, crush 2d8+13, frightful
presence, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: DR 20/+5, fiendish form, fire subtype, immunities, infernal aura, keen senses, SR 37,
summon baatezu
Saves: Fort +21, Ref +13, Will +21
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 10, Con 27, Int 23, Wis 26, Cha 28
Skills: Bluff +26, Diplomacy +32, Intimidate +35, Jump
+28, Knowledge (any four) +31, Listen +34, Scry +29,
Search +26, Spot +34
Feats: Flyby Attack, Hover, Improved Initiative, Power
Attack, Quicken Spell-Like Ability, Snatch
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or clutch (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 26
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 24–46 HD (Gargantuan)
Hellfire wyrms are draconic agents of the Nine
Hells of Baator that live among
humanoid races on the Material Plane. They are masterful
power brokers, manipulating people and events in
subtle ways. Hellfire wyrms
can steer rulers to fight in
unjust wars, or support
unholy alliances, or even
commit despotic acts against
their people.
A hellfire wyrm is a
diabolic-looking, winged
dragon with vicious bone
spikes jutting from its head
and shoulders. Smoke rises
continually from its scales,
and its eyes burn an intense
yellow. The monster’s scales
shift in color to give the
appearance of flowing molten
lava, and they stink of brimstone.
Hellfire wyrms entrench themselves
in regional politics by using their knowledge, wealth, and persuasive abilities to force
through their foul agendas. The typical wyrm does not limit
its actions to any one kingdom, and it often has a different
identity for each realm it visits. It takes great pains to hide
its draconic form, usually assuming the shape of a charismatic tiefling when dealing with humanoids and assassinating anyone who learns its true identity. Hellfire wyrms
retreat to secret lairs when not actively scheming.
A hellfire wyrm speaks Draconic, Infernal, and Common,
as well as the languages of any nearby humanoid races.
COMBAT
Utterly fearless and almost unstoppable in battle, hellfire
wyrms are expert tacticians. They keep to the air, slinging mindaffecting spells and withering breath attacks at their enemies.
Breath Weapon (Su): A hellfire wyrm can breathe a 50-
foot cone of infernal flame that deals 14d10 points of
damage. Each creature caught in the area can attempt a
Reflex save (DC 29) to take half damage. One-half of the
damage from this attack derives from infernal power and is
therefore not subject to reduction by protective elemental
magic. Once the wyrm breathes, it must wait 1d4 rounds
before using its breath weapon again.
Crush (Ex): A flying hellfire wyrm can land on opponents
three or more size categories smaller than itself as a standard
action, using its whole body to crush them. A crush attack
affects as many creatures as can fit under the wyrm’s body.
Each creature in the affected area must succeed at a Reflex save
(DC 29) or be pinned, automatically taking 2d8+13 points of
bludgeoning damage. Thereafter, if the wyrm chooses to maintain the pin, treat it as a normal grapple attack
(grapple bonus +40). While pinned, the opponent takes crush damage each round.
Frightful Presence (Ex): When a
hellfire wyrm charges, attacks, or flies
overhead, it inspires terror in
all creatures within 240 feet
that have fewer Hit Dice or levels
than it has. Each potentially affected opponent must attempt
a Will save (DC 30). On a
failure, a creature with 4 or
fewer Hit Dice becomes panicked for 4d6 rounds, and one
with 5 or more Hit Dice becomes
shaken for 4d6 rounds. A successful save leaves that opponent
immune to that hellfire wyrm’s
frightful presence for 24 hours.
Dragons ignore the frightful presence effect of a hellfire wyrm.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—blasphemy,
charm person, demand, desecrate, dictum, fire storm,
greater dispelling, hold person, improved invisibility,
misdirection, pyrotechnics, sending, suggestion, teleport
125
HELLFIRE
WYRM126
without error, true seeing (divine version), unholy aura, unhallow,
wall of fire. Caster level 20th; save DC 19 + spell level.
Fiendish Form (Su): At will, a hellfire wyrm can produce
an effect like that of a shapechange spell, except that only the
normal form of any tiefling or devil may be assumed.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A hellfire wyrm is immune to fire
damage but takes double damage from cold unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, it takes half
damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Immunities: A hellfire wyrm is immune to sleep and
paralysis effects.
Infernal Aura (Su): Any creature within 5 feet of a hellfire wyrm automatically takes 5d4 points of fire damage per
round. It can suppress this aura as a free action.
Keen Senses (Ex): A hellfire wyrm sees four times as
well as a human in low-light conditions and twice as well in
normal light. It also has darkvision with a range of 120 feet.
Summon Baatezu (Sp): Once per day, a hellfire wyrm may
summon a single barbazu, cornugon, or gelugon with a
100% chance of success. This ability functions like a summon
monster spell of the appropriate level. A summoned devil
automatically returns whence it came after 1 hour. A
baatezu that has just been summoned cannot use its own
summon ability for 1 hour.
Feats: A creature that is flung by a hellfire wyrm after being
snatched travels 100 feet and takes 10d6 points of damage. If
the hellfire wyrm is flying, the creature takes this damage or
the appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
HOOK HORROR
Large Aberration
Hit Dice: 10d8+20 (65 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 22 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +10 natural), touch 12,
flat-footed 19
Attacks: 2 claws +13 melee and bite +8 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+7, bite 2d6+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, power sunder,
rending bite
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., light sensitivity
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +8
Abilities: Str 24, Dex 17, Con 14, Int 7, Wis 12,
Cha 9
Skills: Climb +16, Hide +8*, Jump +15, Listen +13
Feats: Cleave, Improved Trip (B), Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary, pack (5–20), or clan (21–40)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–30 (Huge)
Sly hunters of cavernous subterranean areas, hook horrors
are territorial monsters that distrust intruders and fiercely
protect their hunting grounds. Underground areas where
hook horrors dwell echo with the constant clacking and
scraping sounds of their hooks against stone, as they wend
their way across cliffsides and cavern walls.
A hook horror stands about 9 feet tall and weighs approximately 400 pounds. Its long, powerfully built arms and legs
end in wickedly curved hooks. Its head resembles a vulture’s, with a monstrous beak. Its torso is shaped like a
beetle’s body and covered with a rough, stonelike exoskeleton, studded with sharp, bony protuberances.
Hook horrors normally live in extended family groups or
clans, each of which is ruled by the eldest female. The eldest
male usually leads the clan’s hunters and warriors. The clan
stores its eggs communally, in a central, well-defended area
of its home system of caverns or warrens.
Hook horrors are omnivores, consuming lichens, fungi,
plants, and any animals they can catch. Meat is their preferred food, and drow is rumored to be one of their
favorite meals.
Hook horrors speak Undercommon.
COMBAT
Hook horrors attack in groups, using their climbing skills to
ambush foes from above. They fight cooperatively and work
together against the largest and best armed opponents.
Hook horrors use their arm hooks to trip foes. If a battle
goes poorly, they retreat by
scaling walls.
Improved Grab
(Ex): If a hook horror hits an opponent that is at least
one size category
smaller than itself
with both claw
attacks, it deals
normal damage
and attempts to
start a grapple
as a free action
without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +18). If it
gets a hold, it automatically hits with its
rending bite attack on
the same round. (This
replaces its normal
bite attack for that
round.) Thereafter, the hook
horror has the
HOOK
HORRORoption to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
claws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the hook horror is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals damage for both claw
attacks and a rending bite.
Power Sunder (Ex): A hook horror attempting to
strike a foe’s weapon or shield does not incur an attack
of opportunity. On a successful power sunder
attack, a hook horror deals double damage.
Rending Bite (Ex): A hook horror can
automatically bite a grabbed foe for
3d6+10 points of damage.
Blindsight (Ex): A hook horror
emits high-frequency sounds, inaudible to most other creatures, that
bounce off nearby objects and creatures. This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 60 feet. The hook
horror usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks
to notice creatures within range of its blindsight. A silence
spell negates this ability and forces the hook horror to rely
on its weak vision, which has a range of 10 feet.
Light Sensitivity (Ex): Exposure to bright light
(such as sunlight or a daylight spell) imposes a –2
penalty on a hook horror’s attack rolls.
Skills: *A hook horror receives a +8 racial bonus
on Hide checks when in subterranean areas.
IMMOTH
Large Elemental (Air, Cold, Water)
Hit Dice: 10d8+40 (85 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (perfect), swim 30 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +6 natural), touch 12, flatfooted 15
Attacks: 2 claws +10 melee and tail slap +5 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4+4 plus 1d6 cold, tail slap 1d6+2 plus
1d6 cold plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Ice runes, poison, spells
Special Qualities: Cold subtype, DR 5/+1, elemental
traits, icewalking, immunities, SR 23
Saves: Fort +11, Ref +10, Will +4
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 19, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 21
Skills: Climb +12, Hide +11, Jump +13, Spot +12, Swim +12
Feats: Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any cold
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
Immoths originate from the coldest regions of the Elemental Planes of Air and Water, although their thirst for
knowledge takes them to many other planes of
existence. They tend to dwell in forbidding, freezing regions. Though they are
solitary creatures, immoths maintain
contact with others of
their kind, sharing
secrets and coming
to each other’s aid
when necessary.
An immoth appears as a gleaming, 8-foot-tall giant
carved from dense,
translucent ice. It resembles a bearded, hulking dwarf with icy talons
and a large, crystalline tail.
The creature covers itself
with gemlike nuggets of
enchanted ice called
ice runes.
Immoths seem to
be highly curious
about all forms of
humanoid life, as
well as arcane and divine
magic, but they generally take a great interest in all
things. They barter with intelligent beings for information but show no compunction about taking what they
want by force if more peaceful methods fail. These relentless gatherers of knowledge and secrets hide their information in icy libraries.
One legend that planar travelers tell speaks of why the
immoths seek out information. The tale goes that long
ago, a powerful, mad sorcerer tried to recruit elementals to
serve him. When they refused, he punished them with a
vile curse: They must seek out and collect the words of his
curse and return them to their planar home—a place
referred to in the tale as the Mountain of Ultimate Winter.
According to the story, this place was so cold that spoken
words froze in the air and fell to the ground. The cursed
elementals who lived there took on new forms and
became the creatures now known as immoths. They then
began traveling the planes to find the sorcerer’s words.
This tale bolsters the widely held theory that immoths
believe words themselves to have power. (Certainly, the
verbal components of spells lend some credence to the
idea.) Though the true reasons for their diligent search for
knowledge are unknown, it is clear that the monsters
prize words for their own sake, not merely the knowledge
those words convey.
Immoths eat any sort of living creatures, feeding on the
life essence rather than the actual flesh—though they
127
IMMOTH128
nonetheless consume the latter. It is not known how, or
even whether, immoths reproduce.
Immoths speak Aquan, Auran, and Common.
COMBAT
Before wading into battle, an immoth casts spells
designed to bolster its physical and defensive capabilities.
In melee, it immobilizes as many foes as possible with its
tail poison and uses rune magic to overcome any serious
threats. Most immoths prefer runes that inflict pain or
can debilitate opponents. When seriously threatened,
these monsters flee by walking up the nearest icy cliff. Then, from on high, they cast
damaging spells to deter
foes from following.
Ice Runes (Sp): Any spell
an immoth has prepared
can be inscribed on an ice
nugget. The creature can
trigger the spell contained
in such an ice rune as a free
action. An ice rune remains
magical until triggered by
the immoth. Each immoth has at least 3d4+2
ice runes embedded on
its body. Some wonder
whether this ability
lends credence to the
story about frozen words
in the Mountain of Ultimate Winter.
Poison (Ex): An immoth
delivers its freezing venom
(Fortitude save DC 19) with
each successful tail attack.
The initial damage is paralysis (1d6+2 rounds), and the
secondary damage is 1 point
of Intelligence drain per
round of paralysis.
Spells: An immoth can
cast arcane spells as a 12th-level sorcerer (spells/day 6/8/7/
7/7/6/3; spells known 9/5/5/4/3/2/1; save DC 15 + spell
level). It cannot cast spells with the fire descriptor.
Cold Subtype (Ex): An immoth is immune to cold
damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and double damage on
a failure.
Elemental Traits (Ex): An immoth is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits
or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Icewalking (Ex): This ability works like the spider climb
spell, except that it applies to all icy surfaces and it is
always active.
Immunities (Ex): Because of its dense crystalline body,
an immoth takes only half damage from piercing and slashing weapons.
IXITXACHITL
An ixitxachitl is an aquatic creature very similar to a ray—
indeed, many adventurers have mistaken one for the other.
The greatest difference between rays and ixitxachitls is
that the former are simple, inoffensive creatures and the
latter are intelligent, organized, and evil.
Ixitxachitls create lairs by
hollowing out coral reefs to
form bewildering mazes. From
these strongholds, they wage
war on sahuagins, locathahs,
merfolk, coastal humans, and
any other intelligent creatures that encroach on
their territory. They tend
to treat their homes as
badly as they do their enemies,
however, stripping them clean
of all plant and animal life
before moving on to new, unspoiled reefs.
Ixitxachitls are universally
despised by all undersea races
for their rapacious lifestyle, their aggression,
and their habit of enslaving captives. A large ixitxachitl settlement often contains
twice as many slaves as it does
ixitxachitls. Anything that can
survive underwater can be found
captive in an ixitxachitl maze,
including nixies, gargoyles, and
even humans or elves who are
wearing magic items that allow
underwater breathing.
AVERAGE IXITXACHITL
Like a manta ray, an average ixitxachitl has a plain brown or
black topside with a lighter-colored underside and a long
tail. But this is where the resemblance ends. An ixitxachitl’s large mouth is filled with triangular, razor-sharp
teeth, and its eyes are intelligent and cruel.
Combat
Individually, ixitxachitls are quite weak. They seldom attack
unless they have overwhelming numbers or the opportunity to spring an ambush. They have been known to conceal
IXITXACHITL
LGWthemselves in the sand and muck of the sea bottom, waiting
for enemies to pass by so they can rush in among them.
VAMPIRIC IXITXACHITL
Vampiric ixitxachitls are not undead, though they do
share several traits with vampires, such as long canine
teeth and the ability to drain energy. Vampiric ixitxachitls
are immune to turning attempts and do not possess the
standard undead traits. One of these monsters usually
leads any group of average ixitxachitls.
Combat
Vampiric ixitxachitls prefer to hang back, hidden, and
allow their underlings to enter combat while they size up
the opposition, If the fight is going well, they join in, looking for easy targets. If the outcome seems doubtful, they
try to support their underlings in strikes against the most
dangerous-looking foe.
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature hit by a vampiric
ixitxachitl’s bite attack gains one negative level. For each negative level bestowed, the vampiric ixitxachitl heals 5 points of
damage. If the amount of healing is more than the damage the
creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit points.
If the negative level has not been removed (with a spell such as
restoration) before 24 hours have passed, the afflicted opponent
must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 12) to remove it. (The
vampiric ixitxachitl uses its Constitution modifier instead of
its Charisma modifier to determine the save DC.) Failure
means the opponent’s level (or Hit Dice) is reduced by one.
Fast Healing (Ex): A vampiric ixitxachitl regains lost
hit points at the rate of 5 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the vampiric ixitxachitl to regrow or
reattach lost body parts.
IXITXACHITL SOCIETY
Though they are occasionally encountered in rivers that
empty into the sea, most ixitxachitls live in shallow ocean
depths or coral reefs. Once they have selected a site for their
lair, they have their slaves carve out a lair for them. Any group
of ixitxachitls is led by a single powerful individual (usually a
cleric or a vampiric ixitxachitl) that rules by intimidation.
IXITXACHITL CHARACTERS
Some ixitxachitls are accomplished clerics, generally serving any chaotic evil deity (and having access to the Chaos
129
IXITXACHITL
Average Ixitxachitl Vampiric Ixitxachitl
Small Aberration (Aquatic) Small Aberration (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 1d8+1 (5 hp) 2d8+2 (11 hp)
Initiative: +3 +3
Speed: Swim 30 ft. Swim 30 ft.
AC: 16 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural), 16 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 13 touch 14, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Bite +2 melee Bite +3 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6+1 Bite 1d6+1 plus energy drain
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — Energy drain
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft. Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +3 Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +4
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 16, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 7 Str 12, Dex 16, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +11, Intuit Direction +5, Knowledge Hide +11, Intuit Direction +5, Knowledge
(nature) +5, Listen +5, Spot +5, Swim +9, (nature) +5, Listen +6, Spot +6, Swim +9,
Tumble +7 Tumble +7
Feats: Dodge Dodge
Climate/Terrain: Warm aquatic Warm aquatic
Organization: Solitary, pair, pod (5–12 plus 1 2nd-level cleric), Solitary, pair, pod (1–2 plus 5–12 average
or shoal (10–100 plus 5 2nd-level clerics, 2 ixitxachitls and 1 2nd-level cleric), or shoal
5th-level clerics, and 20–200 slaves) (1–2 plus 10–100 average ixitxachitl,
5 2nd-level clerics, 2 5th-level clerics,
and 20–200 slaves
Challenge Rating: 1 3
Treasure: No coins, no goods, double items No coins, no goods, double items
(wearable items only) (no weapons, potions, or scrolls)
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: By character class 3–4 HD (Small); 5–6 HD (Medium-size);
7–8 HD (Large); or by character class130
and Evil domains), but occasionally following Erythnul
specifically. An ixitxachitl’s favored class is cleric.
An average ixitxachitl PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 2. Thus, a 1st-level ixitxachitl cleric has an ECL of 3 and is the equivalent of a 3rdlevel character. A vampiric ixitxachitl PC’s effective
character level (ECL) is equal to its class level + 5. Thus,
a 1st-level vampiric ixitxachitl cleric has an ECL of 6 and
is the equivalent of a 6th-level character.
JAHI
Tiny Undead (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 25d12 (162 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (+2 size, +4 deflection), touch 16,
flat-footed 16
Attacks: Incorporeal touch +14
melee
Damage: Incorporeal touch
1d3 plus 1d4 Charisma
damage
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2
ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Charisma damage, Charisma
drain, dominate person
Special Qualities: Incorporeal subtype, invest
Charisma, SR 27, undead traits
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +18
Abilities: Str —, Dex 11, Con —, Int 15, Wis 15, Cha 18
Skills: Balance +2, Bluff +9, Diplomacy +16, Escape Artist
+15, Hide +18, Intimidate +6, Jump +2, Listen +14,
Search +12, Sense Motive +12, Spot +14, Tumble +15
Feats: Ability Focus (dominate person), Alertness, BlindFight, Expertise, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative, Iron
Will, Lightning Reflexes, Quicken Spell-Like Ability
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary or harim (1 plus 1 14th-level
chosen one and 4–20 7th-level followers)
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil
Advancement: 26–50 HD (Tiny)
The jahi is an incorporeal undead made of unfulfilled
desires. It attacks by magically dominating its prey.
The jahi appears as a ghostly image of a serpentine, scaled
worm with three elongated faces. Normally, it is found
wrapped around the throat or chest of a creature it has
selected to be its “chosen one.”
A jahi prefers to work behind the mask of its chosen one,
letting the blame for any excesses fall upon the latter. Once
it has a chosen one, the monster begins to accumulate a
group of dominated followers, who form the nucleus
of a debauched cult dedicated to the jahi’s worship.
The creature feeds off the
Charisma of these followers,
all the while encouraging
them to greater heights of
hedonistic excess.
COMBAT
Jahis are sometimes encountered alone, but more
often they have numerous
enslaved individuals nearby.
If encountered alone, the
monster selects the individual with the most pleasing
appearance as its chosen
one. If it can successfully
dominate that opponent,
it drains his or her Charisma and replaces it with
its own.
Charisma Damage (Su):
Any creature hit by a jahi’s
incorporeal touch attack
takes 1d4 points of Charisma damage (or twice that
amount on a critical hit).
The jahi heals 5 points of damage (or 10 on a critical hit)
whenever it deals Charisma damage.
Charisma Drain (Su): Each day, a jahi’s chosen one (if
any) must make a Fortitude save (DC 26) or permanently
lose 1d3 points of Charisma. The jahi heals 5 points of
damage whenever it drains Charisma, gaining any excess as
temporary hit points.
Dominate Person (Sp): Up to four times per day, a jahi
can use dominate person (caster level 20th; save DC 20).
Incorporeal Subtype: A jahi can be harmed only by
other incorporeal creatures, +1 or better magic weapons,
spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. The
creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal source, except for force effects or attacks made with
ghost touch weapons. A jahi can pass through solid objects,
but not force effects, at will. Its attacks ignore natural
armor, armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and
force effects work normally against them. A jahi always
moves silently and cannot be heard with Listen checks if it
doesn’t wish to be.
Invest Charisma (Ex): After draining all the Charisma
from its chosen one, a jahi can automatically adhere to
that creature (usually by wrapping around its throat or
chest) and replace the lost Charisma with its own. While
so invested, the creature uses the jahi’s Charisma for all
JAHICharisma-based checks. This investment lasts as long as the
jahi and the chosen one are in physical contact. If seriously
threatened, or if it decides to select another chosen one, the
jahi detaches, removing the investment of its Charisma.
At that point, the chosen one’s Charisma score falls to 0
and he or she becomes unconscious until at least 1 point of
Charisma has been regained.
Undead Traits: A jahi is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a
Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. A jahi
cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is willing.
The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
JERMLAINE
Tiny Fey
Hit Dice: 1/2 d6–1 (1 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 size, +3 Dex), touch 15, flat-footed 12
Attacks: Diminutive dart +5 ranged, or Tiny shortspear
–2 melee
Damage: Diminutive dart 1d3–4, Tiny shortspear 1d3–4/×3
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Qualities: Low-light
vision, speak with rats
Saves: Fort –1, Ref +5,
Will +5
Abilities: Str 3, Dex
17, Con 8, Int 8, Wis
16, Cha 5
Skills: Animal Empathy
+1, Craft (trapmaking)
+3, Hide +15, Listen +9,
Move Silently +7, Spot +9
Feats: Alertness
Climate/Terrain:
Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair,
gang (3–5), raiding party
(4–16 plus 2–8 rats or 1–4
giant rats), or plague
(10–60 plus 4–16 rats
or 2–8 giant rats)
Challenge Rating: 1/2
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually
neutral evil
Advancement: 1–2 HD (Tiny)
Jermlaines, sometimes called jinxkin or banemidges, are
tiny humanoid-shaped beings with foul dispositions and
evil designs. They are remarkably adept at hiding and
sneaking, so they are the enemies of all who venture
underground.
A jermlaine appears to be a shaggy humanoid about 1 foot
tall. Its eyes are tiny and beady, and its hair is sparse and
filthy. It either dresses in dirty rags and scraps of hide or
simply goes naked. Its skin is baggy, wrinkled, and always
crusted with filth.
Jermlaines’ speech amounts to high-pitched chitters
and squeaks that are easily mistaken for the noises produced by rats or bats. (Indeed, rats are among the few
living creatures that will have anything to do with them.)
A few jermlaines can speak Common, Dwarf, Gnome,
Goblin, or Orc, but seldom can any individual speak more
than one of those languages.
COMBAT
Jermlaines attack only from ambush. If an ambush is impossible, they hide and wait until it is feasible. They always try
to single out injured, ill, or sleeping foes as their first targets.
Jermlaines enjoy sneaking into camps and vandalizing or
stealing equipment, so long as they stand a good chance of
getting away without combat.
Rather than confront an enemy, jermlaines prefer to dig
pits or build net-dropping traps and other
devices that can capture prey
without a fight. Once an enemy is caught in a pit or a
net, jermlaines swarm
over him, pummeling to
cause subdual damage
until the target is knocked
out. They have also been
known to pour acid or
flaming oil over
trapped foes that
appeared too
dangerous to approach directly,
even while trapped.
Speak with Rats
(Sp): At will, a jermlaine can produce an
effect like that of a speak
with animals spell (caster
level 3rd), except that it
enables communication only with rats
and dire rats.
131
JERMLAINE132
JUGGERNAUT
Huge Construct
Hit Dice: 18d10 (99 hp)
Initiative: –4
Speed: 10 ft.
AC: 29 (–2 size, –4 Dex, +25 natural), touch 4, flat-footed 29
Attacks: 6 slams +21 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+10
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, spell-like abilities, squash
10d10+20
Special Qualities: All-around vision, DR 20/+2, construct
traits, fast healing 10, immunities, SR 36
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +2, Will +8
Abilities: Str 31, Dex 3, Con —, Int —, Wis 15, Cha 16
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 19–32 HD (Huge); 33–54 HD (Gargantuan)
A juggernaut is a stony behemoth that serves as a weapon of
war. Whether deployed to soften up the enemy prior to an
invasion or used for defensive purposes, a juggernaut combines sheer size and magical abilities into a potent, nearly
unstoppable force.
A juggernaut appears
as a squat, square or round
stone building situated
atop wide stone rollers.
Six sturdy stone arms jut
from its sides, three on
the right and three on
the left. A juggernaut is
often decorated with
frightening stone carvings and horrific painted
icons, making it a terrible
sight to behold. Occasionally a juggernaut is
constructed with an
interior hiding space
that can accommodate
up to two Medium-size
creatures safely.
COMBAT
A juggernaut attacks by
rolling slowly forward,
crushing all in its path
to dust. Those who avoid
this attack find themselves targeted by the
construct’s powerful fists, which try to force them under its
rollers. A juggernaut targets escaping foes with spell-like
abilities that hinder or block movement, and then changes
direction to roll over immobile creatures. It stops only when
changing direction or when blocked by some insurmountable obstacle. A juggernaut uses wall of force not only to block
fleeing opponents, but also to make bridges over rivers and
chasms so that it can pursue escaping targets.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a juggernaut hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +31). If it gets a hold, it can
attempt to thrust the opponent under its rollers in the next
round, dealing automatic squash damage. Alternatively, the
juggernaut has the option to conduct the grapple normally,
or simply use its hand to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the juggernaut is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—forcecage, grease, hold monster, magic missile, slow, wall of force, web. Caster level 18th; save
DC 13 + spell level.
Squash (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a juggernaut can literally roll over opponents at least
one size category smaller than itself. This attack deals
10d10+20 points of bludgeoning damage. A squashed opponent can attempt either an
attack of opportunity at a –4
penalty or a Reflex save (DC
29) for half damage. A successful saving throw indicates that the target has
been pushed back or aside
(target’s choice) as the juggernaut moves forward.
All-Around Vision
(Ex): A juggernaut can see
in all directions at once.
Because of this ability, it
gains a +4 racial bonus on
Search and Spot checks,
and it cannot be flanked.
Construct Traits: A
juggernaut is immune to
mind-affecting effects,
poison, sleep, paralysis,
stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on
objects. The creature is
not subject to critical hits,
subdual damage, ability
JUGGERNAUTdamage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. It cannot heal itself but can be healed through
repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A juggernaut has
darkvision (60-foot range).
Fast Healing (Ex): A juggernaut regains lost hit points at
the rate of 10 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit
points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does
not allow the juggernaut to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Immunities (Ex): A juggernaut is immune to acid, electricity, and fire.
CONSTRUCTION
Since a juggernaut is constructed from
massive blocks of granite and other dense
stone, a typical specimen weighs at least
50,000 pounds. It costs 70,000 gp to create,
including 5,000 gp for the body. Assembling
the body requires a successful Craft (sculpting)
or Profession (mason) check (DC 18). The creator
must be 18th level and able to cast arcane spells. Completing the ritual drains 2,000 XP from the creator and
requires the bull’s strength, geas/quest, limited wish, polymorph any object, forcecage, grease, hold monster,
magic missile, slow, wall of force, and web spells.
JULAJIMUS
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 16d8+80 (152 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 22 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 20
Attacks: Bite +19 melee and 2
claws +14 melee
Damage: Bite 3d10+9, claw 3d8+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear aura, roar, stunning
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 20/+2, enchantment immunity, polymorph self, fire resistance 20,
sunlight vulnerability
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +7, Will +10
Abilities: Str 28, Dex 15, Con 20, Int 12, Wis 11, Cha 15
Skills: Climb +17, Disguise +12*, Intimidate +10, Jump
+17, Listen +8, Spot +8
Feats: Cleave, Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Skill
Focus (Disguise)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate forests
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 17–32 HD (Gargantuan); 33–48 HD
(Colossal)
Villagers often tell stories of the julajimus to their children.
At some point in such a tale, the main character, a child,
takes in a cute animal as a pet despite repeated warnings
from his or her parents that there isn’t enough food or space
for the creature. The story ends with the rebellious child
hiding the creature, only to have it turn into a julajimus one
night and eat the child alive. In fact, the name “julajimus” is
derived from an ancient phrase “julaji molus,” or “eater of
children.” Ancient texts hint that the cult of an evil god created the first julajimuses from human prisoners.
A julajimus stands a bit more than 18 feet tall and
looks somewhat like a massive baboon. Its arms are
long and muscular, with four fully articulated joints
each. The monster has dark blue or black fur covering its body, plus a long, blue, reptilian
tail. The mouth of a julajimus is disproportionally large for the head and filled
with razor-sharp teeth the size of
scimitar blades.
Julajimuses are territorial, gathering in pairs only once per decade
to mate. The presence of a julajimus in an area has a strange
effect on nearby wildlife, causing animals to
become more aggressive than normal. The
monster is not afraid of
civilization, and the
lights of a village
at night can attract a curious
julajimus to
i n v e s t i g a t e .
Julajimuses
speak Common.
COMBAT
The julajimus enjoys the sensation of gnawing on living
creatures, so it always attacks with its bite first, then follows
up with slashes from its two claws. Despite its size, the julajimus is fast and can easily outrun most prey.
Fear Aura (Su): A julajimus radiates a fear aura that can
chill the blood of the bravest warrior. Any living creature
within 20 feet of the monster must make a Will save (DC 20)
or become frightened. Anyone who saves successfully is
immune to this ability for 24 hours. Each round, a frightened subject gets a new saving throw at the same DC. This is
a mind-affecting fear effect.
Roar (Su): Three times per day, a julajimus can loose an earsplitting roar that can be heard for miles. Every creature within
60 feet must make a Fortitude save (DC 23) or become deafened for 3d6 hours and take 6d6 points of subdual damage.
Stunning (Su): If a julajimus successfully scores a critical
hit with its claws, the opponent must make a Fortitude save
133
JULAJIMUS134
(DC 23) or be stunned for 1d4 rounds by the force of the
blow. A stunned creature is unable to act and loses any positive Dexterity bonus to AC. Furthermore, any attacker gains
a +2 bonus on attack rolls against it.
Enchantment Immunity (Ex): A julajimus is immune
to all spells of the Enchantment school.
Polymorph Self (Su): At will, a julajimus can produce an
effect like that of the polymorph self spell, except that the
only forms it can assume are those of small, cuddly animals
(such as a rabbit, chipmunk, or kitten), and reverting to its
true form is a free action. This ability helps the julajimus
lull its victim into a false sense of security before it shifts
into its natural form to attack.
Sunlight Vulnerability (Ex): A julajimus becomes
paralyzed when exposed to sunlight. Each round, it can
make a Fortitude save (DC 20) to resist the paralysis.
Once paralyzed, it is helpless, although its damage reduction and fire resistance still make it difficult to kill. The
paralysis lasts for 1d4 rounds after the exposure to sunlight ends.
Skills: *A julajimus receives a +10 on Disguise checks
when using its polymorph self ability.
KOPRU
Medium-Size Monstrous Humanoid (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 8d8 (36 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 5 ft., swim 40 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Tail slap +10 melee and 2 claws +8 melee and bite
+8 melee
Damage: Tail slap 1d6+2, claw 1d4+1, bite 1d4+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 3d6+3, dominate person,
improved grab
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft.
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +8, Will +9
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 14, Con 11, Int 11, Wis 12, Cha 10
Skills: Concentration +11, Escape Artist +11, Move
Silently +10, Search +8, Swim +10
Feats: Iron Will, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Warm aquatic and marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, patrol (3–5), or colony (6–24)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: Standard coins (gold and platinum only), standard goods (gems only), no items
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 9–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–12 HD (Large)
Many generations ago, the koprus built a large and mysterious civilization under the sea. For unknown reasons their
society declined, becoming ever more decrepit and degenerate, until now almost none of its former glory remains.
A kopru resembles no known creature, but it combines
several familiar features into one monstrous whole. Its body
is vaguely eellike but ends in three long, flexible, barbed
tails. Its chest is nearly human, and the hands on its two
arms end in vicious webbed claws. Its head grows directly
from its trunk, like a fish’s, and has large, unblinking eyes.
The mouth is surrounded by four tentacles—an oddity that
has led some scholars to propose that the koprus may somehow be related to mind flayers.
Koprus speak Common and Aquan.
COMBAT
Out of the water, a kopru is nearly helpless. On land, it
cannot attack with its claws because it needs its arms to drag
itself across the ground or prop its body up. A kopru in
water, however, is a ferocious opponent in melee combat.
Along with its claws and teeth, it lashes out with its tails, all
three of which strike as one.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a kopru
can constrict a grabbed opponent, dealing 3d6+3 points of
bludgeoning damage.
Dominate Person (Su): Once per day, a kopru can produce an effect like that of a dominate person spell (caster level
10th; Will save DC 14), except that the range is 180 feet and
the duration is eight days.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a kopru hits an opponent that is its
own size or smaller with a tail attack, it deals normal damage
KOPRU
JEand attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +17, including a +7 racial bonus on grapple checks). If it gets a hold, it also
constricts in the same round. Thereafter, the kopru has the
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tails
to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
kopru is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals tail and constrict damage.
KOPRU SOCIETY
Kopru society is matriarchal and savage. The monsters live
in underwater caves, often near the sites of their ancient,
ruined cities. But these reminders of their former glory only
serve to increase their bitterness.
LEECHWALKER
Medium-Size Vermin
Hit Dice: 13d8+39 (97 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 30 ft., swim 20 ft.
AC: 12 (+2 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 tentacle rakes +13 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 1d8+4 plus
wounding
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Blood drink,
improved grab, wounding
Special Qualities: All-around
vision, immunities, vermin
traits
Saves: Fort +11, Ref
+4, Will +5
Abilities: Str 18, Dex
11, Con 16, Int —,
Wis 13, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +3, Listen +5, Move
Silently +5, Search +4, Spot +8,
Swim +12
Climate/Terrain: Any
marsh or underground
Organization: Solitary,
pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 14–26 HD (Medium-size); 27–39 HD (Large)
The leechwalker is a thirsty vermin that can drain a creature
of all its blood in a matter of moments. It usually lurks in
swamps or damp underground areas.
A leechwalker appears to be a massive, 6-foot-tall humanoid covered with thousands of dark, writhing leeches.
Though it has a head, it possessses no recognizable facial features. Its body is slick, as if coated with a thin layer of clear
slime, and it has an impossibly bloated stomach.
COMBAT
Leechwalkers are incapable of sizing up prey, so they fearlessly
go straight for the kill, regardless of their opponents’ capabilities. They usually try to grab their foes, hoping to drain blood
through the thousands of mouths that make up their hides.
Blood Drink (Ex): A leechwalker can drink the blood
from a grabbed victim with a successful grapple check. This
attack deals 2d4 points of Constitution drain.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a leechwalker hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with a tentacle rake attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple
bonus +13). If it gets a hold, it can use its blood drink ability in
the same round. Thereafter, the leechwalker has the option to
conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tentacle to
hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
leechwalker is not considered grappled). In either case, each
successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals tentacle rake
and blood drink damage.
Wounding (Ex): A wound
resulting from a leechwalker’s tentacle rake attack
bleeds for an additional 3
points of damage per
round thereafter. Multiple wounds from such
attacks result in cumulative bleeding loss (two
wounds for 6 points of
damage per round, and
so on). The bleeding can
be stopped only by a successful Heal check (DC
10) or the application of
a cure spell or some other
healing spell (heal, healing
circle, or the like).
All-Around Vision (Ex):
A leechwalker can see in all
directions at once. Because of
this ability, it gains a +4 racial bonus
on Search and Spot checks, and it cannot be flanked.
Immunities: Because of the verminous covering of its
body, a leechwalker takes half damage from bludgeoning
weapons. It is not subject to subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, or death from massive damage.
Vermin Traits: A leechwalker is immune to all mindaffecting effects (charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns,
and morale effects). It also has darkvision (60-foot range).
135
LEECHWALKER
MC136
LEGENDARY ANIMALS
Throughout the world, legends describe extraordinary animals of incredible strength, speed, and power. Such an animal
may have saved a village, fended off a pack of predators to protect the young, aided some legendary hero on a divine quest,
or guided a lost child to safety. These are legendary animals.
According to some theories, such creatures have been
imbued with power beyond that of all other animals
so that they can serve as nature’s defenders. In fact,
they do not exist at all until a need for them
arises. Legendary animals are created from normal animals of their
kind through the power of nature
(or a deity) whenever a character
of appropriate level needs such a
companion. Thus, they are rarely
encountered outside the presence
of a high-level druid or some
other advanced character.
COMBAT
Legendary animals are no larger
than normal animals of the same
kind, but they are considerably
more dangerous in combat.
Saving Throws: A legendary
animal has all good saves.
LEGENDARY EAGLE
With its feathers of bright white
and brilliant yellow, the legendary
eagle is considered an omen of good
weather and good times to come.
Combat
Like all birds of prey, the legendary eagle is a carnivore
that hunts other birds, as well as small reptiles, snakes, and
mammals. It attacks from the air with its claws and beak.
Skills: *A legendary eagle receives a +12 racial bonus on
Spot checks made in daylight.
LEGENDARY APE
This ape appears little different from the common gorilla in
its markings, but even the casual observer can tell that it is
stronger, faster, and tougher than others of its kind.
Combat
Legendary apes are aggressive and territorial. They drop on
opponents from trees to rend flesh with their powerful
claws and teeth.
Rend (Ex): If a legendary ape hits a single target with
both claws, it latches onto the opponent’s body and tears the
flesh. This attack deals 2d8+15 points of damage.
Scent (Ex): A legendary ape can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
LEGENDARY WOLF
A fierce-looking wolf with black, white, or gray fur, this
animal is generally not aggressive toward humanoids,
though extreme hunger may make it attack.
Combat
A legendary wolf encountered singly may fight, or may
retreat to assemble the pack. Whenever possible, legendary
wolves live, move, and hunt in packs.
Trip (Ex): A legendary wolf that hits
with a bite attack can attempt to trip the
opponent as a free action (see Trip in
Chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook) without making a touch attack or provoking
an attack of opportunity. If the attempt
fails, the opponent cannot react to
trip the legendary wolf.
Scent (Ex): A legendary wolf
can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track
by sense of smell.
Skills: A legendary wolf
receives a +2 racial bonus on
Listen, Move Silently, and Spot
checks, and a +4 racial bonus
on Hide checks. *It also receives
a +8 racial bonus on Wilderness
Lore checks when tracking by
scent.
LEGENDARY SNAKE
A strong constrictor with a potent
venomous bite, the legendary snake is
found in underwater lakes, rivers, and streams. It
attacks only when threatened.
Combat
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a legendary snake can constrict a grabbed opponent, dealing
1d8+12 points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary snake hits a Large or
smaller opponent with a bite attack, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +24). If it
gets a hold, it can constrict in the same round. Thereafter,
the legendary snake has the option to conduct the grapple
normally, or simply use its coils to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the legendary snake is not
considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals bite and constrict damage.
Poison (Ex): A legendary snake delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 25) with each successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1d8 points of Constitution damage).
LEGENDARY
ANIMALS
JEScent (Ex): A legendary snake can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of
smell.
Skills: A legendary snake receives a +8 racial bonus on
Hide, Listen, and Spot checks, and a +16 racial bonus on Balance checks. It can use its Strength or Dexterity modifier
(whichever is better) for Climb checks.
LEGENDARY HORSE
Legendary horses can never be domesticated, only befriended. Ancient stories tell of heroes riding these creatures, but even the tales have become very rare.
Combat
A legendary horse can fight while carrying a rider, but the
rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds at a Ride
check (DC 10).
Scent (Ex): A legendary horse can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of
smell.
Carrying Capacity: A light load for a legendary horse
is 0–1,200 pounds, a medium load is 1,201–2,400 pounds,
and a heavy load is 2,401–3,600 pounds. A legendary horse
can drag 18,000 pounds.
LEGENDARY BEAR
The legendary bear doesn’t usually attack humans. Its diet
consists primarily of plants and fish.
Combat
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary bear hits a
Medium-size or smaller opponent with a claw attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +32). Thereafter, the legendary bear has
the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use
its claw to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the legendary bear is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it
makes during successive rounds automatically deals
claw damage.
LEGENDARY TIGER
The legendary tiger is the fiercest and most dangerous land
predator in the animal kingdom. It measures 8–10 feet long
and weighs up to 600 pounds.
Combat
A legendary tiger prefers to attack from ambush, pouncing
on its prey.
137
LEGENDARY
ANIMALS
Legendary Eagle Legendary Ape Legendary Wolf
Small Animal Medium-Size Animal Medium-Size Animal
Hit Dice: 12d8+36 (90 hp) 13d8+39 (97 hp) 14d8+70 (133 hp)
Initiative: +10 +3 +9
Speed: 10 ft., fly 100 ft. (average) 40 ft., climb 20 ft. 60 ft.
AC: 25 (+1 size, +10 Dex, +4 natural), 19 (+3 Dex, +6 natural), 24 (+9 Dex, +5 natural),
touch 21, flat-footed 15 touch 13, flat-footed 16 touch 19, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 2 claws +20 melee and bite +15 2 claws +19 melee and bite + 14 Bite +19 melee
melee melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+2, bite 1d8+1 Claw 1d8+10, bite 2d6+5 Bite 2d6 +10
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — Rend 2d8+15 Trip
Special Qualities: Low-light vision Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +11, Ref +18, Will +11 Fort +11, Ref +11, Will +11 Fort +14, Ref +18, Will +11
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 30, Con 17, Str 30, Dex 17, Con 16, Str 25, Dex 28, Con 21,
Int 2, Wis 16, Cha 13 Int 2, Wis 17, Cha 11 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
Skills: Listen +10, Spot +10* Climb +19, Move Silently +11, Hide +13, Listen +10, Move
Spot +9 Silently +12, Spot +10,
Wilderness Lore +4*
Feats: Weapon Finesse (bite) (B), — Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Weapon Finesse (claw) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any forest, hills, plains, Warm forest and mountains, Any forest, hills, mountains,
and mountains and underground plains, and underground
Organization: Solitary or pair Solitary, pair, or company (3–5) Solitary or herd (5–8)
Challenge Rating: 6 7 7
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 13–24 HD (Small) 14–26 HD (Medium-size) 15–30 HD (Medium-size)138
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary tiger hits a
Medium-size or smaller opponent with a bite attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +34). If it gets a hold, it can attempt to rake
in the same round. Thereafter, the legendary tiger has the
LEGENDARY
ANIMALS
Legendary Snake Legendary Horse Legendary Bear
Large Animal Large Animal Large Animal
Hit Dice: 16d8+112 (184 hp) 18d8+144 (225 hp) 20d8+140 (230 hp)
Initiative: +7 +2 +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 80 ft. 50 ft.
AC: 22 (–1 size, +7 Dex, +6 natural), 19 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +8 natural), 21 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +10 natural),
touch 16, flat-footed 15 touch 11, flat-footed 17 touch 11, flat-footed 19
Attacks: Bite +19 melee 2 hooves +21 melee and bite +16 2 claws +27 melee and bite +22
melee melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+12 plus poison Hoof 2d6+9, bite 1d6+4 Claw 2d6+13, bite 4d6+6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft. (coiled)/10 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 1d8+12, improved — Improved grab
grab, poison
Special Qualities: Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +17, Ref +17, Will +12 Fort +19, Ref +13, Will +13 Fort +19, Ref +14, Will +15
Abilities: Str 27, Dex 24, Con 24, Str 29, Dex 14, Con 27, Str 36, Dex 15, Con 25,
Int 1, Wis 14, Cha 7 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10 Int 2, Wis 16, Cha 13
Skills: Balance +24, Climb +22, Hide +14, Listen +9, Spot +9 Listen +8, Spot +8, Swim +18
Listen +12, Spot +12, Swim +16
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm land, Any land Any forest, hills, mountains,
aquatic, and underground plains, or underground
Organization: Solitary Solitary or herd (6–30) Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 8 8 9
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 17–32 HD (Large) 19–36 HD (Large) 21–40 HD (Large)
Legendary Tiger Legendary Shark
Large Animal Huge Animal (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 26d8+182 (299 hp) 30d8+210 (345 hp)
Initiative: +4 +4
Speed: 50 ft. Swim 100 ft.
AC: 23 (–1 size, +4 Dex, +10 natural), 22 (–2 size, +4 Dex, +10 natural),
touch 13, flat-footed 19 touch 12, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 2 claws +29 melee and bite +24 melee Bite +29 melee
Damage: Claw 2d6+11, bite 2d8+5 Bite 2d8+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, pounce, rake 2d6+5 Improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Low-light vision, scent Keen scent, low-light vision
Saves: Fort +22, Ref +19, Will +17 Fort +24, Ref +21, Will +19
Abilities: Str 33, Dex 18, Con 24, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 11 Str 28, Dex 19, Con 24, Int 1, Wis 14, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +8*, Jump +15, Listen +5, Move Silently +12, Listen +9, Spot +9, Swim +17
Spot +7, Swim +14
Climate/Terrain: Any forest, hill, mountains, plains, and underground Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary or pair Solitary, pair, or school (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 10 10
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 27–48 HD (Large) 31–60 HD (Huge)option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the legendary tiger is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Pounce (Ex): If a legendary tiger charges, it can make a
full attack (including a rake attempt, see below) even
though it has moved.
Rake (Ex): In any round that a legendary tiger has a hold
on an opponent (see Improved Grab, above), it can make
two rake attacks (+29 melee) with its hind legs for 2d6+5
points of damage each. The legendary tiger can also attempt
to rake when it pounces on an opponent.
Scent (Ex): A legendary tiger can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: A legendary tiger receives a +8 racial bonus on
both Hide and Move Silently checks. *In areas of tall grasses
or heavy undergrowth, the Hide bonus improves to +16.
LEGENDARY SHARK
The legendary shark hunts anything it finds in the sea.
Combat
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary shark hits a Large or
smaller opponent with a bite attack, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +39). If it
gets a hold, it can try to swallow in the next round. Alternatively, the legendary shark has the option to conduct the
grapple normally, or simply use its mouth to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the legendary
shark is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds
automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A legendary shark can swallow a
Large or smaller creature by making a successful grapple
check (grapple bonus +39), provided it already has that
opponent in its maw (see Improved Grab, above). Once
inside the legendary shark, the opponent
takes 2d8+13 points of bludgeoning
damage plus 1d8+4 points of acid
damage per round from the shark’s
stomach. A successful grapple check
allows the swallowed creature to
climb out of the stomach and return
to the legendary shark’s mouth,
where another successful grapple
check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to
cut its way out with either claws or a light
piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at
least 50 points of damage to the stomach (AC 18) in this way creates an opening
large enough to permit escape. Once a single
swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole;
thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out.
A legendary shark’s stomach can hold up to 2 Large, 8
Medium-size, 32 Small, or 128 Tiny or smaller opponents.
Keen Scent (Ex): A legendary shark notices creatures by
scent in a 180-foot radius and detects blood in the water at a
range of up to 1 mile.
LEVIATHAN
Colossal Magical Beast (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 32d10 +320 (496 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: Swim 90 ft.
AC: 22 (–8 size, –2 Dex, +22 natural), touch 0, flat-footed 22
Attacks: Bite +39 melee, or 2 tail slams +39 melee
Damage: Bite 4d6+15 and gulp, tail slam 2d6+15
Space/Reach: 50 ft. by 200 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Gulp, ramming, swamping
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 10/–, low-light
vision, SR 36
Saves: Fort +28, Ref +16, Will +13
Abilities: Str 40, Dex 7, Con 30, Int 4, Wis 13, Cha 5
Skills: Listen +5, Spot +5, Swim +23
Feats: Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 25
Treasure: None (see text)
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 33–48 HD (Colossal)
The leviathan is an immense sea creature that takes up residence in a stretch of water, usually a very deep strait, and terrorizes shipping through that zone for years. It sinks some
ships and lets others pass without interference, according to
its own unfathomable whims. Decades
139
LEVIATHAN140
may pass without a sighting; then, for no apparent reason, the
attacks resume, usually in a new location. Whether this is the
same beast awakened from hibernation, the same beast somehow reborn, or an entirely new creature is unknown.
The leviathan is an immense whale of almost unimaginable proportions. Some have seen its head, others have seen
its tail, but those who have seen enough of the monster to
determine its actual size and appearance are dead.
Wherever the leviathan goes, other sea predators follow,
because a sinking ship produces a rich feeding ground for
sharks, barracudas, many varieties of giant fish, dark rays, and
even sahuagin and locathah. Although the leviathan itself has
no interest in treasure, the sea bed beneath its hunting ground
becomes a graveyard for the contents of sunken ships. Many
of these hulks are laden with treasure and valuable cargo.
COMBAT
Obviously, a creature such as the leviathan has no natural enemies. Everything in the ocean is its prey, but ships seem to be
the only things that catch its attention. Once it breaches or
swamps a ship, the leviathan circles back and begins scooping
the bodies of both the living and the dead into its 20-footwide mouth. Its tactics imply a level of anger and a desire to
spread destruction that contradict its low Intelligence score.
Gulp (Ex): A leviathan can swallow a Huge or smaller
creature by making a successful bite attack. The monster’s
interior contains a mass of surging water. Each swallowed
creature must make a Swim check (DC 15) every round.
Success means the swallowed creature takes 1d3 points of
subdual damage but can attack the leviathan from inside
with any weapon other than a bow or crossbow. Failure
means the swallowed creature takes 1d6 points of subdual
damage and must immediately make a second Swim check
(DC 15) to avoid going underwater and starting to drown.
Anyone attacking the leviathan from the inside hits automatically. If the leviathan takes 50 points of damage from
the inside, it disgorges the entire contents of its stomach.
Ramming (Ex): Once every 12 rounds, a leviathan can
move at up to 720 feet and ram a Large or smaller creature or
any sort of ship. To ram, the leviathan must end its movement
in the target’s space. If the target is a ship, the creature always
precedes this attack with a long surface approach so everyone
aboard can see what’s coming. This attack deals 8d6+22 points
of damage. If the target is a creature, it can attempt either an
attack of opportunity or a Reflex save (DC 31) for half damage.
Upon ramming a ship, the leviathan can make a Strength
check to breach its hull, which causes it to sink in 1d10 minutes. The break DC varies with the type of vessel rammed, as
follows: rowboat DC 20, keelboat DC 23, sailing ship or longship DC 25, warship DC 27, or galley DC 30. (See Chapter 5 of
the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide for information about ships.)
Regardless of the check result, every creature aboard must
attempt a Reflex saving throw (DC 15). Success means the creature takes 1d10 points of damage from being thrown about by
the impact; failure means the creature is hurled overboard.
Swamping (Ex): Once every 12 rounds, a leviathan can
create waves up to 40 feet high by rising from the water
and then slamming its enormous tail flukes or head against
the surface. This causes any sailing vessel within 300 feet
to capsize if the character steering it fails a Profession
(sailor) check (DC 15). A modifier applies to this check
based on the type of ship, as follows: rowboat –2, warship +0,
galley or keelboat +3, sailing ship +5, longship +7. Any creature flung into the water by a capsizing ship must succeed at
a Swim check (DC 15) or immediately begin drowning.
LINNORM
Linnorms are truly primeval creatures thought to be offshoots
of dragons. No young ones have been sighted for centuries, so
it is possible that these monsters are dying out. At any rate, by
dragon accounting, the youngest known linnorms are ancient,
and the more powerful individuals are even older than that.
A linnorm is easily distinguished from its more numerous draconic cousins by its lack of wings and rear legs. A
linnorm has an immense, serpentine body, and it moves
through a combination of walking with its forelegs and
snakelike slithering.
No good or lawful linnorms are known to exist; these
creatures are universally hateful, spiteful, and cruel. None
of the three varieties is known for keeping its word or for
honoring bargains. About the best that can be said of linnorms is that not all of them are avaricious.
Linnorms speak Draconic and Abyssal.
COMBAT
Linnorms rely on their breath weapons and prodigious
strength in battle. They are also brilliant tacticians and
strategists, so they usually delay attacking until conditions
are to their advantage. Once battle is joined, they quickly
single out the most dangerous foes for swift elimination.
Breath Weapon (Su): Using a breath weapon is a standard
action. Once a linnorm breathes, it must wait 1d4 rounds
before using a breath weapon again, no matter how many
kinds it has. A blast from a breath weapon always starts at
the linnorm’s mouth and extends in a direction of its choice,
with an area as noted in the description. At the time of use,
the linnorm can choose to shape its breath weapon into
either a line or a cone. The exact dimensions vary with the
variety of linnorm (see the individual descriptions), but
lines are always 5 feet high and 5 feet wide, and cones are as
high and wide as they are long. If the breath weapon deals
damage, each creature caught in the area can attempt a
Reflex save (see individual descriptions for DCs) to take half
damage. Saves against nondamaging breath weapons use the
same DC, but the types vary as noted.
Crush (Ex): A flying linnorm can land on opponents three
or more size categories smaller than itself as a standard action.
A crush attack affects as many creatures as can fit under the linnorm’s body. Each creature in the affected area must succeed
LINNORMat a Reflex save (DC equal to that for the linnorm’s breath
weapon) or be pinned, automatically taking the given amount
of bludgeoning damage. Thereafter, if the linnorm chooses to
maintain the pin, treat it as a normal grapple attack. While
pinned, the opponent takes crush damage each round.
Tail Sweep: A linnorm can sweep with its tail as a standard action. The sweep affects creatures four or more size
categories smaller than the linnorm within a 20-foot-radius
half-circle centered on the linnorm’s rear. Each affected
creature that fails a Reflex save (DC equal to that for the linnorm’s breath weapon) takes the given amount of damage; a
successful save halves the damage.
Blindsight (Ex): A linnorm can ascertain its surroundings by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and scent, but
also by noticing vibration and other environmental clues).
This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures
within 120 feet. A linnorm usually does not need to make
Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Immunities: A linnorm is immune to sleep and paralysis
effects.
Keen Senses (Ex): A linnorm sees four times as well a
human in low-light conditions and twice as well in normal
light. It also has darkvision with a range of 120 feet.
GRAY LINNORM
These creatures are the smallest of the linnorms. They are
also the meanest and most aggressive.
141
LINNORM
Gray Linnorm Dread Linnorm Corpse Tearer
Huge Dragon Colossal Dragon Gargantuan Dragon
Hit Dice: 13d12+65 (149 hp) 20d12+200 (330 hp) 28d12+224 (406 hp)
Initiative: +0 –1 –1
Speed: 30 ft., fly 90 ft. (good), 50 ft., fly 90 ft. (good), 60 ft., burrow 50 ft., fly 90 ft.
swim 30 ft. swim 30 ft. (good), swim 50 ft.
AC: 27 (–2 size, +19 natural), 31 (–8 size, –1 Dex, +30 natural), 33 (–4 size, –1 Dex, +28 natural),
touch 8, flat-footed 27 touch 1, flat-footed 31 touch 5, flat-footed 33
Attacks: Bite +18 melee and 2 claws 2 bites +27 melee and 2 claws +25 Bite +37 melee and 2 claws +35
+16 melee and tail slap melee and tail slap +25 melee melee and tail slap +35 melee
+16 melee
Damage: Bite 2d6+7, claw 2d8+3, Bite 4d8+15 plus energy drain, Bite 4d6+13 plus energy drain,
tail slap 2d6+10 plus poison claw 4d6+7, tail slap 4d6+22 claw 2d8+6, tail slap 2d8+19
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 30 ft./10 ft. 40 ft. by 120 ft./15 ft. 20 ft. by 80 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Breath weapon, crush 2d8+10, Breath weapons, crush 4d8+22, Breath weapon, crush 4d6+19,
poison, spell-like abilities, energy drain, spell-like abilities, energy drain, spell-like abilities,
spells spells, tail sweep 2d8+22 spells, tail sweep 2d6+19
Special Qualities: Blindsight 120 ft., DR 15/+1, Blindsight 120 ft., DR 20/+2, Blindsight 120 ft., DR 30/+3,
immunities, keen senses, SR 31 immunities, keen senses, SR 36 immunities, keen senses, SR 39
Saves: Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +10 Fort +22, Ref +11, Will +18 Fort +24, Ref +15, Will +21
Abilities: Str 24, Dex 11, Con 20, Str 40, Dex 8, Con 31, Str 36, Dex 9, Con 26,
Int 14, Wis 19, Cha 17 Int 15, Wis 22, Cha 21 Int 17, Wis 20, Cha 19
Skills: Bluff +11, Concentration +20, Bluff +24, Concentration +30, Bluff +28, Concentration +30,
Diplomacy +7, Intimidate Diplomacy +7, Intimidate +7, Diplomacy +10, Hide +15,
+5, Knowledge (arcana) +16, Knowledge (arcana) +24, Listen Intimidate +6, Knowledge
Listen +17, Scry +16, Search +26, Scry +24, Search +24, Spellcraft (arcana) +30, Listen +32, Scry
+14, Sense Motive +12, +21, Spot +26, Swim +23 +25, Search +30, Sense Motive
Spellcraft +13, Spot +17, +32, Spellcraft +28, Spot +32,
Swim +15 Swim +21
Feats: Alertness, Flyby Attack, Alertness, Flyby Attack, Alertness, Cleave, Enlarge
Multiattack, Snatch Multiattack, Power Attack, Quicken Spell, Flyby Attack, Multiattack,
Spell-Like Ability, Snatch Power Attack, Quicken Spell-Like
Ability, Snatch
Climate/Terrain: Any hills or mountains Any land Any land
Organization: Solitary Solitary Solitary
Challenge Rating: 20 25 28
Treasure: Standard Standard Double standard
Alignment: Usually chaotic evil Always chaotic evil Always neutral evil
Advancement: 14–18 HD (Huge) 21–26 HD (Colossal) 29–34 HD (Gargantuan)142
The body of a gray linnorm is long, sleek, and very
snakelike. It never uses its two arms to drag or support
itself; instead it moves entirely as a snake, keeping the front
portion of its body raised upright at all times. Its scales form
a subtle pattern of variegated gray.
A gray linnorm lays claim to all that it can see, so it always
seeks out a natural cave in a high place with a commanding
view. By extension, any other creature it sees is a trespasser,
and it never tolerates trespassers in its territory. As soon as it
spots intruders, it moves to attack, usually via either magical flight or wind walking. A gray linnorm does not pause
to study its foes or lay a careful trap; instead, it relies on
speed, terror, and overwhelming offense.
Combat
A gray linnorm casts as many spells as possible while closing
in on enemies, but it prefers fighting tooth and claw to
standing off and pelting foes with magic. On the other
hand, it prefers casting spells to taking a beating, so it always
errs on the side of survival. In dire straits, a gray linnorm
typically uses meld into stone to hide, and then wind walk or
some other spell to leave the area.
Acid Breath (Su): A gray linnorm can breathe caustic
slime in either a 50-foot cone or a 100-foot line. This attack
deals 6d8 points of acid damage, or half that amount on a
successful Reflex save (DC 21). On a failed save, the slime
also eats away the target’s nonmagical metal weapons and
armor, making them useless in 1d6+5 rounds.
Poison (Ex): The tip of a gray linnorm’s tail carries a venomous stinger that delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC
21) with each successful tail slap attack. The initial
damage is 1d6 points of Constitution damage, and the secondary damage is 2d6 points of Constitution damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—fly, protection from arrows;
3/day—contagion, meld into stone, shapechange, wind walk.
Caster level 17th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Spells: A gray linnorm can cast divine spells as a 17thlevel cleric. It has access to spells from the Destruction
and Evil domains (spells/day 6/6/6/6/6/4/4/3/2/1; save
DC 14 + spell level).
Feats: A creature that is flung by a gray linnorm after being
snatched travels 70 feet and takes 7d6 points of damage. If the
gray linnorm is flying, the creature takes this damage or the
appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
DREAD LINNORM
The dread linnorm is the largest of the linnorms. These creatures are aggressively territorial, defending their vast lairs
vigorously against intruders.
A dread linnorm can grow to an immense length. Two
shaggy, draconic heads, each at the end of its own long, serpentine neck, top its mammoth body. A dread linnorm’s
scales are primarily charcoal black, but they shimmer and
flicker from black to gray as if lit from within.
This creature prefers to lair in a cave located in some
remote, desolate place. Few natural caverns are big enough
to house a dread linnorm comfortably, so it usually devotes
considerable energy over the course of several centuries to
excavating its home. Eventually, its lair becomes a tremendous subterranean labyrinth of twisting corridors, plunging shafts, lakes, hot springs, and fabulous natural grottoes,
which can stretch
for miles below
the surface. Invaders could wander for weeks
through a dread
linnorm’s lair
without ever
e n c o u n t e r i n g
the monster. The
creature also fits
out its lair with
deadly traps to
capture, bewilder,
or kill intruders.
These obstacles are
often built around natural perils, such as scalding geysers, and sometimes they include triggers
for hazards, such as massive
rockfalls that can seal passages.
Treasure is not as important to a dread
linnorm as it is to a dragon. A typical dread linnorm accumulates immense wealth over its long life but
LINNORMcares little for it. Most of its treasure lies forgotten wherever
it was dropped after a brief examination. Given the extensiveness of the creature’s lair and the casual way it leaves
valuables strewn about, it might seem easy to sneak in,
scoop up a few bags of gold and silver, and slip away unseen.
In fact, however, such an act unfailingly brings severe retribution. A dread linnorm doesn’t care whether a thief stole a
sack of gems, an ancient magic rod, or a bucket of rocks; it
cares only that the sanctity of its lair was violated and its
possessions stolen. Should this occur, it does all in its
power to recover the stolen items and punish the thieves.
Failing that, it vents its rage on its surroundings, laying
waste to the countryside, leveling villages, burning crops,
and devouring livestock.
Dread linnorms are always surly and uncommunicative.
Combat
A dread linnorm relies primarily on its twin breath weapons
and its spells in combat. Once its opponents are severely
damaged, it switches to melee attacks.
Breath Weapon (Su): As a standard action, a dread linnorm can breathe either with one head or with both heads
simultaneously. It can produce two different breath
weapons, cold or fire, each as either a 70-foot cone or a 140-
foot line. Each head can use a different breath weapon,
shape its breath weapon differently, or both. Whatever the
shape, the cold breath deals 12d6 points of cold damage and
the fire breath deals 12d6 points of fire damage. A successful
Reflex save (DC 30) halves the damage from either attack. A
creature caught in both breath weapons is affected by both
and must save against each one separately.
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature bitten by either
head of a dread linnorm gains one negative level. For each
negative level bestowed, the dread linnorm heals 5 points of
damage. If the amount of healing is more than the damage
the creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit
points. If the negative level has not been removed (with a
spell such as restoration) before 24 hours have passed, the
afflicted opponent must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 25)
to remove it. Failure means the opponent’s level (or Hit
Dice) is reduced by one.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—fly, telekinesis; 4/day—move
earth; 3/day—power word stun; 2/day—antipathy, sympathy.
Caster level 18th; save DC 15 + spell level.
Spells: A dread linnorm can cast arcane spells as an
18th-level sorcerer (spells known 9/5/5/4/4/4/3/3/2/1;
spells/day 6/8/7/7/7/7/6/6/5/3; save DC 15 + spell level).
Immunities (Ex): In addition to sleep and paralysis
effects, a dread linnorm is immune to all spells of the
Enchantment school.
Feats: A creature that is flung by a dread linnorm after
being snatched travels 120 feet and takes 12d6 points of
damage. If the dread linnorm is flying, the creature takes
this damage or the appropriate falling damage, whichever
is greater.
CORPSE TEARER
This hideous beast is generally considered to be the worst of
a very bad lot. Characters who are lucky enough to
encounter the creature in one of its rare, agreeable moods
discover that it is knowledgeable about many ancient, magical mysteries. Whatever its initial mood, however, no meeting with it is likely to end without bloodshed unless the
intruders pay a staggering duty—and even that is no guarantee of safety.
A corpse tearer’s immense body is only a little shorter
than that of a dread linnorm, but it usually keeps itself in
a compact shape. Its scales are covered with slime, fungus,
moss, lichen, and tufts of branching cilia. When it is lying
still, a corpse tearer resembles an enormous, ancient,
fallen tree.
Corpse tearers adjust easily to any climate or terrain, but
they always make their homes beneath ancient burial
grounds. Their lairs are usually guarded by their undead
servants—everything from skeletons to very powerful
undead such as vampires and banshees. These creatures are
often the remains of adventurers who came looking for
treasure, or just unlucky travelers who wandered too near
the creature’s territory. When not on guard duty, these
undead tunnel into the ancient graves above the corpse
tearer’s lair in search of more gold, gems, and other treasures to increase its hoard.
Combat
A corpse tearer seldom fights in its lair becuase it prefers
that intruders never find its home. Instead, when a threat
draws near, it sends out undead minions to delay the
strangers and learn their weaknesses. Then, when it feels
that it has enough information about its foes, it takes to the
sky and attacks with its breath weapons and spells, crushing
or clawing paralyzed characters as the opportunity arises. It
falls back on teeth and claws only as a last resort.
Breath Weapon (Su): As a standard action, a corpse
tearer can breathe either paralysis or disease, each as
either a 60-foot cone or a 120-foot line. The paralysis
breath forces each living creature caught in its area to succeed at a Fortitude saving throw (DC 32) or be paralyzed
for 1d6+12 rounds. Every living creature caught in the
area of the corpse tearer’s disease breath must succeed at a
Fortitude save (DC 32) or contract linnorm fever. The
incubation period is 12 hours, and the disease deals 1d6
points of Strength damage and 1d3 points of Constitution
damage (see Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON
MASTER’s Guide).
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature hit by a corpse
tearer’s claw gains one negative level. For each negative
level bestowed, the corpse tearer heals 5 points of damage.
If the amount of healing is more than the damage the creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit points.
If the negative level has not been removed (with a spell
such as restoration) before 24 hours have passed, the
143
LINNORM144
afflicted opponent must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
28) to remove it. Failure means the opponent’s level (or
Hit Dice) is reduced by one.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—fly;
1/day—animate dead, control undead,
darkness, dimension door, enervation,
etherealness, polymorph self, protection
from good, speak with dead, spectral
hand, vampiric touch, water breathing. Caster level 15th; save DC
14 + spell level.
Spells: A corpse tearer can
cast divine spells as a 17thlevel cleric. It has access to
spells from the Destruction
and Evil domains (spells/day
6/7/6/6/6/5/4/3/2/1; save DC
15 + spell level.)
Feats: A creature that is flung
by a corpse tearer after being
snatched travels 110 feet and
takes 11d6 points of damage. If
the corpse tearer is flying, the
creature takes this damage or
the appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
LOXO
Large Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 5d8+5 (27 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 14 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Huge morningstar +8 melee and 2 slams +3
melee, or 2 slams +8 melee, or Large javelin +5 ranged
Damage: Huge morningstar 2d8+6, slam 1d6+2 (secondary) or 1d6+4 (primary), or Large javelin 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Berserk rage, trample 1d8+6
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft.
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +4
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 12, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +6, Listen +8, Spot +8, Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Warm plains
Organization: Solitary, pair, company (3–5), or herd
(20–40 plus 20% noncombatants plus 1–4 2nd-level
rangers, 1 2nd-level wizard, and 1 3rd–5th level ranger)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
Loxos are usually peaceful creatures, but they defend their
territories and families with great tenacity. They are among
the most dangerous of all desert dwellers to those who incur
their wrath.
A loxo appears to be a humanoid elephant. Its skin is
bluish-gray, wrinkled, and covered with rough, sparse
hair. It has thick, round limbs, flat feet, short, stubby fingers, and large ears. Its most striking feature is the pair of
trunks that grow from its face, framed by large tusks.
Each trunk is about 2 feet long and has three fingerlike
digits at the end. The typical loxo prefers simple, rustic
clothing, particularly cut from cloth patterned with circles or diamonds.
Loxos speak their own language and Common.
COMBAT
Loxos prefer melee to ranged combat, and they use thrown
weapons only when they can’t close with enemies. If a herd
is threatened, the adult male loxos charge intruders while
the females move the young to a defensible location. Once
the young are secure, the males make a fighting retreat
toward the females, so that they too can join the melee.
Berserk Rage (Ex): A loxo that sees a clan member
killed or incapacitated enters a berserk rage. For 6 rounds,
the loxo gains a +4 bonus to Strength, a +4 bonus to
Constitution, and a +2 morale bonus on Will saves, but
LOXOtakes a –2 penalty to Armor Class. The following changes
are in effect as long as the berserk rage lasts: HD 5d10+15
(37 hp); AC 12, touch 8, flat-footed 11; Atk +10 melee
(2d8+9, Huge morningstar) and +5 melee (2d6+3, 2
slams), or +10 melee (1d6+6, 2 slams), or +5 melee (1d8+6,
Large javelin); SA trample 1d8+9 (DC 18); SV Fort +4, Ref
+5, Will +6; Str 23, Con 17; Climb +8. After the berserk
rage ends, the loxo is fatigued (–2 penalty to Strength, –2
penalty to Constitution, can’t charge or run) until the end
of the encounter.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a loxo can trample Medium-size or smaller opponents. This attack deals 1d8+6 points of bludgeoning
damage. A trampled opponent can attempt either an
attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC
16) for half damage.
LOXO SOCIETY
Loxo herds are seminomadic. They move about, grazing
and harvesting fruits and nuts from groves of trees they
have planted. When they reach a grove or a good area for
grazing, they build temporary huts to serve as shelter
until it’s time to move on. Loxos need massive amounts of
grass and other vegetable material to fuel their big bodies.
When not eating, these creatures create rustic works of
art, which they barter for items
or tools they need.
Loxo herds are divided
into clans, and all members
of a clan wear the same
pattern of clothing. Each
herd has a chief (called
a lox-fithik, or herdlieutenant), who is a
ranger, and a tunnuk,
who has at least two
levels of wizard.
LOXO
CHARACTERS
A loxo’s preferred character class is ranger. Loxo
rangers choose favored
enemies from among the
most common threats to
their territories and habitats.
A loxo PC’s effective
character level (ECL) is
equal to its class level + 7; thus,
a 1st-level loxo ranger has an
ECL of 8 and is the equivalent
of an 8th-level character.
MARRASH
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil, Lawful)
Hit Dice: 7d8+7 (38 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft., fly 70 ft. (good)
AC: 19 (+3 Dex, +6 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 16
Attacks: 2 claws +8 melee and bite +3 melee, or mighty
composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) +10/+10 ranged
Damage: Claw 1d4+1, bite 1d6, mighty composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) 1d8+1/×3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Disease, double bowfire, taklif arrow
Special Qualities: Outsider traits, protection from
arrows, scent
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +8, Will +6
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 16, Con 13, Int 9, Wis 12, Cha 8
Skills: Balance +15, Jump +3, Listen +11, Search +8, Spot
+11, Tumble +13
Feats: Dodge, Point Blank Shot
Climate/Terrain: Warm jungle and desert
Organization: Solitary, pair, or flight (3–6)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard plus 1 taklif arrow
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 8–12 HD (Medium-size)
A marrash (plural marrashi) is a plague bearer that spreads
disease through combat.
Physically, a marrash resembles a winged
gnoll, except that it has birdlike talons on its
hands and feet and double-jointed, birdlike legs. It stands about 5 feet tall and
has a 10-foot wingspan. Occasionally
wizards or sorcerers summon marrashi to the Material Plane to act
as guards, assassins, or instruments of terror or revenge.
Every marrash carries a
longbow and a quiver of
arrows. About a third
of its arrows are vectors for disease; the
rest are normal except
for one—a magic taklif arrow. Any creature
hit by this arrow contracts a disease similar
to the marrash variant
of filth fever (see Disease,
below), except that the spirit
of a new marrash is generated
within the victim’s body. When the
infected creature dies, the marrash
spirit devours its soul over the next 1d6
days. Upon completing that process, the
145
MARRASH146
newborn marrash rises in the victim’s reconstituted corpse,
which assumes the form of a marrash.
Like most outer-planar beings, marrashi are not willing
servants for summoners. A marrash bound to serve a mortal
tries to use its taklif arrow on its master without the latter’s
knowledge, in the hope that the newborn marrash will
release its parent from bondage.
Marrashi speak Common and Infernal.
COMBAT
Marrashi consider themselves weak and vulnerable on the
ground, so they take to the air whenever possible.
Disease (Ex): Any creature hit by a marrash’s disease
arrow must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 14) or contract a
more virulent outer-planar version of filth fever. The incubation period is 1d3 days, and the disease deals 1d3 points of
Dexterity damage and 1d3 points of Constitution damage
(see Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
Each day thereafter that the disease lasts, the infected creature must also succeed at a second Fortitude save (DC 14), or
1 point each of that day’s Dexterity and Constitution
damage becomes Constitution drain instead.
Double Bowfire (Ex): In battle, a flying marrash grips
its longbow with its taloned feet and draws the string with
both hands. This unusual technique allows it to fire two
arrows nearly simultaneously at its highest attack bonus
as a full attack action.
Taklif Arrow: Any creature hit by a taklif arrow must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 14) or contract a disease similar to the marrash variant of filth
fever (see Disease, above). The incubation period is 1 day, and the disease deals 1d3
points of Dexterity damage and 1d3 points
of Constitution damage (see Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON
MASTER’s Guide). However, a creature that fails any Fortitude saving
throw after its initial infection dies instantly, and neither raise dead nor resurrection can restore it to life.
The corpse rises as a new
marrash 1d6 days later.
Protection from Arrows (Sp):
A marrash can use protection
from arrows, as the spell, at
will. Caster level 10th.
Outsider Traits: A marrash has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be
raised or resurrected.
Scent (Ex): A marrash
can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes,
and track by sense of smell.
MEENLOCK
Tiny Aberration
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 13 (+2 size, +1 Dex), touch 13, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 claws +3 melee
Damage: Claw 1d2–2
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear aura, meenlock transformation,
paralysis, rend mind
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., dimension door,
telepathy
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +2, Will +5
Abilities: Str 6, Dex 13, Con 10, Int 11, Wis 12, Cha 15
Skills: Hide +16, Listen +5, Move Silently +8, Spot +4,
Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: Track (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any subterranean, temperate forest
Organization: Brood (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 5–6 HD (Tiny); 7–8 HD (Small)
These dreadful, pitiful creatures were once humans,
dwarves, elves, gnomes, and halflings.
Through indescribable tortures, they
were transformed into the hideous
creatures known as meenlocks.
Now they themselves carry
on their forebears’ grisly
work, kidnapping travelers
and adventurers and inflicting
the same nightmarish metamorphosis upon them.
A meenlock is a grotesque,
twisted parody of a humanoid creature. It stands about
2 feet tall, but its body is
stooped and deformed, causing it to drag the hooked
claws that serve as its hands
on the ground. Its hide is
covered with shaggy spines
and painful ulcers.
Meenlocks shun the light,
so they excavate lairs deep
beneath remote forests. They
often create vast labyrinths of tunnels that connect subterranean caverns,
so that they can travel great distances without venturing
MEENLOCKaboveground. The entrances to meenlock lairs are expertly
camouflaged and sealed with flat stones. If the creatures
discover that one of their entrances has been tampered
with, they track down and capture the intruders to protect
their secrets.
Meenlocks communicate entirely through telepathy.
They can also grunt and click, but these sounds don’t constitute a language. Occasionally the creatures act as if
they are talking in order to conceal their telepathy ability
from enemies.
COMBAT
Meenlocks fight if forced to do so, but they are weak combatants. They prefer to pick off members of a group one at a
time over a long period. The first attack they usually launch
against their selected target is a slow mental assault (see
Rend Mind, below). Some meenlocks have been known to
stalk and harass their victims in this way for days.
Fear Aura (Su): As a free action, a meenlock can produce
a fear effect in a 30-foot-radius burst, centered on itself. Any
creature within the area that fails a Will save (DC 14)
becomes catatonic from fear for 1d4+4 rounds. During this
time, it rolls into a ball, hugs its knees, or simply stands in
place, shivering and staring. Any creature that makes a
saving throw against the effect cannot be affected again by
that meenlock’s fear aura for 24 hours.
Meenlock Transformation (Su): Meenlocks drag their
victims to their lairs and bind them to prevent their escape
before starting the transformation. (A captured creature may
be able to escape from its bonds and fight its way clear, but
the odds are against it, especially since the height of the
mazelike tunnels in a meenlock lair forces a Medium-size
creature to crawl on hands and knees.) Then three or more of
them gather around to touch each helpless humanoid or
monstrous humanoid. After 1d6 hours of such physical contact with the meenlocks, all of the subject’s ability scores fall
to 1 (except for any already at 0), reducing him or her to a
drooling, helpless state (no saving throw). A heal or greater
restoration spell at this point restores
the creature to normal. In another
1d6 hours, the transformation is
complete; the subject becomes forever a meenlock,
losing all of its previous
classes and abilities. At this
point, only a wish or miracle
spell can restore the victim.
Paralysis (Ex): Any creature hit by a meenlock’s claw
must make a Fortitude save
(DC 14) or be paralyzed for 3d6
rounds. The meenlocks use this
time to bind the paralyzed creature. Once bound, a typical human
can be carried by three meenlocks.
Rend Mind (Su): A meenlock can project thoughts and
suggestions into the mind of a single creature within 300 feet.
These thoughts are usually geared to cause paranoia—images
of stalking monsters or peering eyes, and the sensation of
being followed, watched, or sized up. The target of this mindaffecting phantasm must make a successful Will save (DC 14)
or take 1d4 points of Wisdom damage. Once a meenlock uses
this ability, it must wait 1d4 rounds before doing so again.
Dimension Door (Su): Once every 2 rounds, a meenlock
can produce an effect like that of a dimension door spell,
except that the range is only 60 feet and no additional
weight can be transported.
Telepathy (Ex): A meenlock can communicate through
telepathy with any other creature that has a language. This
communication has a range of 300 feet.
MEGALODON
Gargantuan Beast (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 24d10+168 (300 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: Swim 120 ft.
AC: 20 (–4 size, +2 Dex, +12 natural), touch 8, flatfooted 18
Attacks: Bite +24 melee
Damage: Bite 4d6+15
Space/Reach: 20 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., keen scent, low-light
vision
Saves: Fort +21, Ref +16, Will +9
Abilities: Str 31, Dex 15, Con 24, Int 1, Wis 12, Cha 10
Skills: Hide –10, Listen +6, Spot +6, Swim +18
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary or swarm (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement:
25–48 HD (Gargantuan); 49–72
HD (Colossal)
147
MEGALODON148
One of the largest predators in the world, a megalodon
defers to dragons and little else. Large enough to devour
an entire whale, the megalodon gives even hardened
sailors nightmares.
A megalodon is normally 55 to 65 feet long, and it weighs
between 10 to 60 tons. Rumors of individual megalodons
reaching a length of 80 to 90 feet cannot be confirmed.
COMBAT
Megalodons attack anything they perceive to be
edible—including each other. They can leap as high as
40 feet out of the water to snap at low-flying rocs
and small dragons. They bite with their powerful
jaws and can swallow smaller creatures.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a megalodon
hits an opponent that is at least one size
category smaller than itself with a bite
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +40). If it gets a
hold, it can try to swallow on the next
round. Alternatively, the megalodon has
the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the
opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the megalodon is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A megalodon can swallow a
single creature that is at least one size category smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +40), provided it already has that opponent
in its mouth (see Improved Grab, above). Once
inside the megalodon, the opponent takes 2d8+10
points of bludgeoning damage plus 1d8+4 points of
acid damage per round from the megalodon’s gullet.
A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of the gullet and
return to the monster’s maw, where
another successful grapple check is needed
to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with either
claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing
at least 25 points of damage to the gullet (AC 20) in this
way creates an opening large enough to permit escape.
Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action
closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must
cut its own way out. A Gargantuan megalodon’s gullet can
hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128 Small or
smaller opponents.
Keen Scent (Ex): A megalodon notices creatures by
scent within a 180-foot radius and detects blood in the
water at a range of up to one mile.
MEGAPEDE
Colossal Vermin
Hit Dice: 32d8+256 (400 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: 80 ft., burrow 20 ft.
AC: 18 (–8 size, –2 Dex, +18 natural), touch 0, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 5 tentacle rakes +32 melee, or bite +32 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 2d8+16, bite 4d6+16 plus poison
Space/Reach: 15 ft. by 100 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison
Special Qualities: DR 25/+5, SR 31, tremorsense,
vermin traits
Saves: Fort +26, Ref +8, Will +11
Abilities: Str 43, Dex 7, Con 27, Int —, Wis 12, Cha 4
Skills: Listen +10, Spot +7
Climate/Terrain: Warm desert
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 20
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 33–64 HD (Colossal)
True terrors of the desert, megapedes constantly hunt the
dunes and sandy plains for food. The desert offers little
refuge to creatures fleeing these enormous predators.
A megapede looks like an enormous centipede with a long, segmented body and hundreds of pairs of legs. Its tough, bulbous
body is covered with dense orange and
brown bristles. The creature’s tremendous
mandibles twitch involuntarily when it
senses prey. A megapede can grow to
more than 100 feet in length.
COMBAT
Megapedes lie in wait just under the
sandy surface of the desert, lunging at
creatures who wander too near. In a
fight, a megapede usually rends its
enemy with five vicious claw attacks
per round. It reserves its poisonous bite for foes that prove especially daunting.
Poison (Ex): A megapede
delivers its poison (Fortitude save
DC 44) with each successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (2d6 points of Constitution
damage and 1d4 points of Dexterity drain).
Tremorsense (Ex): A megapede can automatically
sense the location of anything within 120 feet that is in contact with the ground.
Vermin Traits: A megapede is immune to all mind-affecting effects (charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns and
morale effects). It also has darkvision (60-foot range).
MEGAPEDEMOONBEAST
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 18d8+90 (171 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 10 ft.
AC: 17 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 10 tentacle rakes +21 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 4d6+10
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Bite 4d8+10, constrict 3d10+15, fear aura,
improved grab, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: All-around vision, darkvision 60 ft., SR 22
Saves: Fort +11, Ref +8, Will +12
Abilities: Str 30, Dex 15, Con 21, Int 8, Wis 9, Cha 18
Skills: Climb +26, Listen +20, Search +3, Spot +18
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Iron Will, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: 1/10th coins; 50% goods; 50% items plus 1
moonstone
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 19–27 HD (Huge); 28–36 HD (Gargantuan)
The moonbeast is a ferocious, tenacious, and thoroughly
horrifying adversary. Simply seeing one can send strong
adventurers fleeing for their lives, and actually fighting one is
a challenge beyond the capabilities of all but the most powerful heroes. Unfortunately, because of the monster’s ties to certain magic devices, some adventurers find themselves inadvertently (and often fatally) entangled with a moonbeast.
Since moonbeasts are active only at night and are usually
invisible, eyewitness descriptions of them tend to be hazy. In
reality, a moonbeast’s body is a roughly cylindrical mass of
squishy flesh, usually between 20 and 30 feet tall. Its height is
variable; even a single beast sometimes changes in size from
one appearance to the next. A moonbeast has no discernible
head, no front or back, and no top or bottom—it is equally
comfortable in any orientation. Its trunk is encircled at each
end by a ring of tentacles. Each ring has a number of tentacles equal to 1 + 1/2 the moonbeast’s Hit Dice, rounded
down. (Advanced moonbeasts may have more tentacles, and
thus more tentacle rake attacks, than the standard 18-HD
variety.) These tentacles are lined with barbs and hooks to
catch objects or prey, and they also serve as the moonbeast’s
means of locomotion. To move, the creature grabs fixed
objects with its tentacles and drags itself forward. Its body is
covered with a slick, oily substance. Four rings, each consisting of eight flexible, retractable, 1-foot-long eyestalks are
placed above and below each ring of tentacles.
In spite of its immense size, a moonbeast can squeeze its
soft body through an opening as small as a 5-by-5-foot
square. Wherever it passes, it leaves a telltale trail of glistening slime. Moonbeasts are invisible most of the time, but
their horrid smell and the noises they make almost constantly give away their presence to observant creatures.
COMBAT
A moonbeast uses its improved invisibility ability to remain
invisible even in combat. In battle, a moonbeast prefers to
strike, grab, and constrict. It can use as many as seven of its
tentacles against a single target.
Bite (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a moonbeast
can attempt to bite a grabbed opponent (+21 melee), dealing
4d8+5 points of slashing damage on a successful hit. A
moonbeast cannot use its bite attack against a creature it has
not already grabbed.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a moonbeast can crush a grabbed opponent, dealing 3d10+15 points
of bludgeoning damage.
Fear Aura (Su): A moonbeast continually emanates a fear
effect in a 60-foot-radius, centered on itself. Any creature
within the area that fails a Will save (DC 23) is paralyzed
with fear for 2d6 rounds. A new saving throw is required
each time a potentially affected creature comes within range
of the moonbeast.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a moonbeast hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a tentacle rake attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start
a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +31). If it gets a hold, it automatically constricts and can attempt to bite the grabbed opponent in the same round. Thereafter, the moonbeast has the
149
MOONBEAST150
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use a
single tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the moonbeast is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals tentacle rake and
constrict damage and allows another bite attempt.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—dispel magic, fog cloud, improved
invisibility, lightning bolt; 1/day—chain lightning, cloudkill, disintegrate, Evard’s black tentacles, fireball, ice storm, mirror image,
summon monster VI. Caster level 18th; save DC 14 + spell level.
All-Around Vision (Ex): A moonbeast can see in all
directions at once. Because of this ability, it gains a +4 racial
bonus on Search and Spot checks, and it cannot be flanked.
MOONSTONES
In general, moonbeasts want nothing to do with the world.
They are content to hide in their remote lairs, dreaming of
their native homes (wherever those may be) and venturing out
only occasionally to catch a meal. But each of these creatures is
inseparably linked to a item called a moonstone—a rare and
unusual gem that resembles a pearl. Magic items and very
expensive pieces of jewelry occasionally contain moonstones.
Once in a creature’s possession, a moonstone slowly and
insidiously works its way into its owner’s psyche. After 1d6+3
weeks, the owner must succeed at a Will save (DC 30) or
become so attached to the item containing the moonstone
that he or she would refuse to relinquish it under any circumstances. In the course of
a campaign, this obsession
can go unrecognized for quite
a long time, and the owner may
not be consciously aware of it
until a situation arises that would
require separation from the item.
At some point, however, the
moonbeast that is linked to that
moonstone awakens, leaves its
lair, and begins tracking down
the gem. Its ultimate goal is to
recover the moonstone, slay the
owner, and then return to its lair.
Oddly, the monster seems to care
nothing for the moonstone
itself; it desires only that absolutely no one else possess it.
In fact, the moonbeast is
quite likely to abandon the
recovered moonstone item
somewhere during its
return trip. The object
may then lie forgotten
for years before another
unlucky adventurer discovers it anew and begins the
horrid cycle all over again.
MOONCALF
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 15d10+108 (190 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)
AC: 25 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +13 natural), touch 12, flatfooted 22
Attacks: 2 tentacle rakes +18 melee and 6 tentacle-arms
+13 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 2d6+4/19–20, tentacle-arm 1d6+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft. (30 ft. with tentacle rake)
Special Attacks: Bite 2d8+6, improved grab, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: Blindsight 100 ft., DR 10/+1, keen senses
Saves: Fort +16, Ref +14, Will +12
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 24, Int 21, Wis 21, Cha 11
Skills: Concentration +16, Hide +15, Knowledge (arcana)
+10, Knowledge (history) +10, Listen +15, Spot +19
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Expertise, Improved Critical
(tentacle rake), Improved Initiative, Improved Trip,
Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes, Toughness
Climate/Terrain: Any hills or mountains
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always neutral
evil
Advancement: 19–27 HD
(Huge); 28–60 HD (Gargantuan)
Mooncalves are otherworldly monstrosities that, according to rumor,
flew down to earth from the dark side
of the moon. When these creatures
“come to ground,” they never venture
farther down than mountaintops, the
tips of tall hills, and other high,
lonely, desolate places.
A mooncalf combines
the body of an immense
cephalopod with the wings
of a bat. It has six short
tentacle -arms that it uses
for close combat and two
long tentacles that it uses
to attack at a distance because of their 30-foot
reach. The creature’s beaklike mouth is located where
the tentacles meet.
Mooncalves do not speak, but they
can communicate telepathically with
any other creature within a 100-foot radius
that has a language.
MOONCALF
MDCOMBAT
Mooncalves prefer to fly high above their targets, striking at
foes from a distance with their spell-like abilities. In melee,
they may grab and crush opponents with their tentacles, or
drag foes into their slavering beaks, or command the elements to electrocute an enemy.
Bite (Ex): With each successful grapple check, a mooncalf automatically hits a grabbed opponent with its bite
attack, dealing 2d8+6 points of slashing damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a mooncalf hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with a tentacle rake attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +23). If it gets a hold, it automatically hits
with its bite attack on the same round. Thereafter, the
mooncalf has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
mooncalf is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals tentacle rake and bite damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: 1/day—call lightning, control weather, control winds, dominate animal, greater
magic fang, protection from elements, quench, resist
elements. Caster level 9th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Blindsight (Ex): A mooncalf can ascertain its surroundings by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and
scent, but also by noticing vibration and other environmental clues). This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 100 feet. The
mooncalf usually does not need to make Spot or
Listen checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Keen Senses (Ex): A mooncalf sees four times
as well a human in low-light conditions and twice
as well in normal light. It also has darkvision (100-
foot range).
MOONRAT
Tiny Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 1/4 d10 (1 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 15 ft., climb 15 ft.
AC: 14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), touch 14, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Bite +4 melee
Damage: Bite 1d3–4
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision,
lunar mind, scent, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +3
Abilities: Str 2, Dex 15, Con 11, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 2
Skills: Balance +10, Climb +10, Hide +16, Move Silently +8
Feats: Iron Will, Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Swarm (10–100)
Challenge Rating: 1/4
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always evil
Advancement: —
Moonrats are indistinguishable from
normal rats except in
moonlight. Lunar light
has an insidious effect on these creatures, making them
smarter, stronger, and
more ferocious than
any rat ought to be.
On nights when the
moon shines, moonrats pour out of their
darkened lairs to
soak up the pallid
rays and spread
terror throughout humanoid settlements.
COMBAT
Moonrats fight just
like normal rats do,
biting and tearing
with their teeth. Under
the influence of lunar
light, moonrats also gain the
ability to organize, converse with one
another, formulate complex plans, and
operate complicated devices. Their leaders
remember things done and learned nights or even months
before. When the moon’s light is at its peak, moonrats are
capable of making and acting on long-range plans that may
require dozens of full-moon nights to complete. These
schemes are often so subtle and involved that casual
observers do not connect incidents relating to a long-range
moonrat plan until it is too late to stop it.
Lunar Mind (Ex): A lunar modifier applies to a moonrat’s Strength and Intelligence scores while under the
influence of moonlight. The size of this modifier depends
on the amount of moonlight that reaches the moonrat,
according to the table below. On a clear night, the moonlight equivalent is the same as the actual phase of the
moon. On a night when clouds or heavy mist obscure the
moon, the moonlight equivalent is one or two steps (DM’s
choice) lower on the table than the actual moon phase. On
worlds with multiple moons, either choose only one moon
151
MOONRAT152
to influence the moonrats, or estimate the moonlight
equivalent of both moons on any given night, using the
new moon and full moon entries as the minimum and
maximum values, respectively, for that world.
Moonlight Equivalent Lunar Modifier
New Moon +0
Crescent +1
Quarter +2
Half +4
Gibbous +6
Full +8
For every 2 points of Strength increase, a moonrat gains a +1
bonus on attack and damage rolls. The effect of the Intelligence boost is open to considerable DM interpretation. Use
the Intelligence scores for the following creatures as benchmarks to determine the moonrats’ increased intellectual
capacity: Int 3 (minimum for a human), Int 6 (average for a
gargoyle), Int 8 (average for a centaur or gnoll), Int 9 (average for an orc), Int 10 (average for a goblin). No extra skill
points are gained for a lunar Intelligence boost.
Scent (Ex): A moonrat can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Because of its extraordinary
sense of smell, a moonrat retains its Dexterity bonus to AC
even when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked.
Skills: A moonrat receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide and
Move Silently checks and a +8 racial bonus on Balance
checks. It uses its Dexterity modifier for Climb checks.
MORKOTH
Medium-Size Aberration (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 7d8+7 (38 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: Swim 50 ft.
AC: 18 (+2 Dex, +6 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Bite +4 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8–1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Hypnosis
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., spell reflection
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +8
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 16, Wis 17, Cha 13
Skills: Hide +14, Knowledge (arcana) +10, Listen +13,
Spellcraft +10, Spot +13, Swim +7
Feats: Blind-Fight, Dodge, Improved Initiative, Skill Focus
(Hide)
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 8–14 HD (Medium-size); 15–21 HD (Large)
Few creatures of the deep enjoy reputations for cruelty and
hatred as extensive as that of the morkoth.
The top half of a morkoth resembles a deep-sea fish
with bulging eyes, protruding teeth and a saillike fin
along its back. Its lower body resembles that of an octopus in that it has eight tentacles, but the creature also
sports limbs like the legs of a crustacean. Occasionally a
morkoth has a squidlike beak instead of a mouth, but the
typical version just has a maw like that of a fish.
A morkoth lives a solitary existence, spending most of its
days inside a maze of tunnels constructed of rock or coral at
the bottom of the sea. The outer part of a morkoth’s lair usually
consists of six tunnels, all spiraling outward, crisscrossing and
interconnecting with one another in a bewildering pattern.
The creature’s actual home is at the center of this maze.
A morkoth uses a variety of lures to draw prey into its
clutches. It may dangle treasure as a prize, but its hypnosis
ability is the most powerful lure at its disposal. Once in a
morkoth’s clutches, a victim doesn’t usually survive for long,
since these creatures are interested in capturing only food,
not slaves or captives. A morkoth has little interest in treasure except as a lure for prospective victims.
COMBAT
A morkoth’s bite is its only offensive weapon. Normally it
uses its hypnosis ability to lure a passing creature through its
MORKOTHmaze, then devours its prey alive. The morkoth is a cautious
monster, so it chooses its victims carefully. Typically, it
tries to lure the last in a group of passing creatures into its
tunnel, hoping that the others won’t notice that one’s
absence until it is too late.
Hypnosis (Su): Any creature passing within 20 feet of
the entrance to a morkoth’s lair must make a successful
Will saving throw (DC 14) or be hypnotized. A hypnotized creature moves unerringly through the maze at its
usual speed. Once in center of the lair, the affected creature floats quietly in a trance, waiting to be devoured at
the morkoth’s leisure. A hypnotized creature is helpless
against the morkoth’s attacks but may attempt a new
saving throw at the same DC each round that the morkoth
attacks it.
A morkoth can hypnotize any number of creatures at one
time. When it is outside its lair, this ability has a range of 20
feet. Hypnosis is a mind-affecting compulsion effect.
Spell Reflection (Su): The morkoth has a special type of
spell resistance that causes the effect of any spell, spell-like
ability, or magic item that it successfully resists (even those
that affect areas) to bounce off and reflect back at the caster.
If the caster of a spell or the user of a spell-like ability or
magic item fails a caster level check (DC 15), he or she
becomes either the spell’s target or the point of origin for
the spell’s effect, as appropriate. If the morkoth is the subject of a dispel magic spell that is not reflected, its spell
reflection ability is suppressed for 1 round.
MORKOTH TUNNELS
A creature that has successfully resisted the morkoth’s hypnosis ability might try to rescue a friend who was drawn
into the tunnels. The passages of a morkoth’s lair are so
narrow that only one Medium-size character can swim
through any 5-foot section at a time. An ambitious DM
could map out the mazelike tunnel system and allow the
characters to try to work their way through it.
Alternatively, the DM could handle penetration of the lair
abstractly as follows: Roll 2d6 to determine the number of
intersections between the tunnel’s entrance and the
morkoth’s lair, allowing 10 to 40 feet between intersections.
At each intersection, have the lead character make an Intuit
Direction check (DC 15) to discern the correct path. Each
correct choice brings the group one intersection closer to
the lair; each incorrect choice adds 1d6 intersections to the
route and an equal number of rounds to the time needed to
complete the trip.
It is always possible to navigate any labyrinth by simply
choosing one wall and following wherever it goes. A creature using this method can eventually find the morkoth’s
chamber without error, but this route is usually not the
shortest possible path. Roll 1d6+6 for the number of intersections the rescuers must traverse using this method.
MUDMAW
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 8d10+24 (68 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 20 ft., swim 30 ft.
AC: 17 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flatfooted 16
Attacks: 2 tentacle rakes +11 melee and bite +6 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 1d6+4, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 2d8+6, improved grab, spelllike abilities, trample 2d6+6
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 10/+1, low-light
vision, scent, SR 18
Saves: Fort +9, Ref +7, Will +5
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 12, Con 17, Int 3, Wis 12, Cha 16
Skills: Hide +7*, Swim +12, Wilderness Lore +3
Feats: Improved Initiative, Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Warm marsh
Organization: Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 9–16 HD (Large); 17–24 HD (Huge)
Mudmaws wait just below the surface of the water in
swamps, slow rivers, and lakes for potential prey to come
down to the water and drink. In this state, this carnivorous
ambush predator resembles a floating log—a fact that many
an unwary adventurer has discovered.
This fearsome swamp predator resembles a crocodile
with a rubbery green tentacle growing from each corner
of its mouth. Its immense maw is filled with needle -
sharp teeth.
Mudmaws are intensely territorial; they have been
known to attack even other mudmaws that intrude on the
areas they claim. If some disaster makes more meat available than any one of them could eat, they allow others of
their kind to share the bounty and then leave again. If two
mudmaws are encountered, they are peacefully courting
and preparing to mate.
COMBAT
A mudmaw typically tries to grab creatures two or more size
categories smaller than itself with its tentacles and drag
them under the water to drown. Against larger creatures
within 40 feet, it uses slow, then lunges from the water at a
full charge, trampling its prey before grabbing it and returning to the water. A mudmaw doesn’t attack if it can’t reach its
prey with its tentacles or with a single 40-foot charge. Larger
creatures, or those that prove to be a threat, find pursuing
the monster difficult because it uses soften earth and stone to
turn the edge of the water into a quagmire, then swims away
or uses water walk to cross it.
153
MUDMAW154
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a
mudmaw can crush a grabbed opponent, dealing 2d8+6
points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a mudmaw hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
tentacle rake attack, it deals normal damage and attempts
to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +24, including +8
racial bonus on grapple checks). If it gets a hold, it also
constricts in the same round. Thereafter, the mudmaw
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the mudmaw is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals tentacle
rake damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—slow, soften earth and stone,
water walk. Caster level 5th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a mudmaw can trample opponents at least one size
category smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d6+6 points
of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 18) for half damage.
Scent (Ex): A mudmaw can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: *A mudmaw receives a +20 bonus on Hide checks
when in water.
MYCONID
These intelligent, mobile mushroms are among the more
unusual creatures that live deep below ground. Myconids
(also called fungus ones) are gentle, quiet, shy, and thoughtful.
They always view outsiders with distrust because they assume
that all strangers are destructive and violent. To ensure that
they can live in peace, they usually make their homes far from
the more commonly traveled subterranean paths.
A myconid can be from 2 to 12 feet tall. The primary physical characteristics that distinguish it from other giant toadstools are its limbs—the lower half of its trunk is split in
half to form two legs, and two arms depend from just below
its “cap.” It also has two eyes in the cap, which are perfectly
concealed when it closes them. Its hands seem to have
random numbers of fingers and thumbs. Occasionally, an
individual with more than two arms or legs pops up.
A myconid has a life span of about twenty-four years.
When first spawned, an infant resembles a giant toadstool.
At the age of four, it reaches adulthood and becomes mobile.
Thereafter, its appearance changes very little as it ages.
COMBAT
The fungus ones hide from strangers and fight only as a last
resort. When forced into combat, a myconid releases spores
as a ranged attack or uses its slams in melee.
Spores (Ex): As a standard action, a myconid can release a cloud of spores. These
spores come in several different varieties, as
described below. As it enters each new stage of
life (increasing its Hit Dice by 1), a myconid
gains a new variety of spore but does not lose
access to the previous varieties. Each type of spore
can be used a number of times per day equal
to the myconid’s Hit Dice. A 3-HD
myconid, for example, has the
first three spores (distress, reproduction, and rapport), and it can use each
variety three times per day. Spores can be
released either in a 120-foot spread or as a
40-foot ray against a single target, as
noted in the individual spore descriptions.
Distress: These spores alert all other
myconids within the area that danger is
near. They are released in a 120-foot spread.
Reproduction: These spores eventually germinate into new infant myconids. They are released as a 120-foot
spread and have no detrimental effects
on nonmyconids.
Rapport: Myconids do not speak, but
these spores enable them to establish
telepathic communication with each other
and with outsiders. A successful Fortitude saving
throw (DC varies; see individual descriptions) negates the
effect, but it is harmless. Rapport lasts for 30 to 60 minutes
MYCONID
MCwith outsiders, but for 8 hours with other myconids. Rapport
spores can be released as either a 120-foot spread or a 40-foot
ray. Regardless of the release area, the communication range
is 120 feet once rapport is established.
Pacification: These spores are released as a 40-foot ray. The
target must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC varies; see
individual descriptions) or become passive for 1 minute.
Being passive is similar to being dazed, except that the target
can take partial actions that don’t involve attacking. This is a
mind-affecting compulsion effect.
Hallucination: These spores are released as a 40-foot ray.
The target must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC varies;
see individual descriptions) or suffer powerful hallucinations that duplicate the effects of a confusion spell for 1 hour.
Animation: Only the myconid sovereign has access to these
spores. When released over a dead body, animation spores
begin a process that covers the corpse with purple fungus.
After 1d4 days, the corpse reanimates as a servant. A servant
has all the characteristics of a zombie of the same size, except
that it retains its previous creature type and it cannot be
turned or otherwise affected as an undead. Over the course of
1d6 weeks, a myconid-animated corpse slowly decays. At the
end of that period it simply disintegrates into dust.
Plant Traits (Ex): A myconid is immune to poison, sleep,
paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to
critical hits or mind-affecting effects. The creature also has
low-light vision.
Skills and Feats: A myconid gains skills and feats as
though it were a fey. A myconid of any kind has EHD as
though it were a Tiny plant.
JUNIOR WORKERS
These youngsters are four to eight years old. They assist
their elders with daily chores and serve as a circle’s first line
of defense.
Combat
Junior workers are ineffective fighters. They release their
spores at the first sign of danger and hide or retreat if threatened. If forced to fight, they tend to rush a single opponent
as a group. Because a junior worker has a reach of 0 feet, it
must enter an opponent’s space to make melee attacks.
Spores (Ex): Junior workers have access only to distress
spores.
AVERAGE WORKER
These myconids are eight to twelve years old. They are the
backbone of the community, and they can perform a wide
variety of tasks.
155
MYCONID
Myconid Junior Worker Myconid Average Worker Myconid Elder Worker
Tiny Plant Small Plant Medium-Size Plant
Hit Dice: 1d8 (4 hp) 2d8+2 (11 hp) 3d8+3 (16 hp)
Initiative: +2 +2 +1
Speed: 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), 13 (+1 size, +2 Dex), 12 (+1 Dex, +1 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 12 touch 13, flat-footed 11 touch 11, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 slams +1 melee 2 slams +2 melee 2 slams +3 melee, or spores +3
ranged touch
Damage: Slam 1d3–1 Slam 1d4 Slam 1d6+1
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — — Spores
Special Qualities: Plant traits, spores Plant traits, spores Plant traits, spores
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +2, Will +1 Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +1 Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +3
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 15, Con 11, Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Str 12, Dex 13, Con 13,
Int 9, Wis 12, Cha 12 Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 13 Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Craft (any one) +2, Hide +13, Craft (any one) +4, Hide +10, Craft (any one) +4, Hide +5,
Knowledge (nature) +2, Listen Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen +6, Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen
+6, Move Silently +5, Profession Move Silently +5, Profession +8, Move Silently +4, Profession
(farmer) +4, Sense Motive +4, (farmer) +5, Sense Motive +4, (farmer) +6, Sense Motive +5,
Spot +6, Wilderness Lore +4 Spot +6, Wilderness Lore +5 Spot +8, Wilderness Lore +6
Feats: Alertness Alertness Alertness
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 1/2 1 2
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral
Advancement: — — —156
Combat
Average workers are fairly proficient fighters. If alerted to
danger, they usually try to hide and then either attack from
ambush or wait until more capable myconids arrive on the
scene. If such reinforcements are available, the average workers
use the aid another action to assist their superiors in combat.
Spores (Ex): Average workers have access to both distress
and reproduction spores.
ELDER WORKER
These myconids are twelve to sixteen years old. They serve as
supervisors for other workers and as shock troops in combat.
Combat
Elder workers usually spray intruders with rapport spores
rather than hiding, as more junior myconids do. They are
quite willing to communicate rather than take aggressive
action. If forced to fight, they try to eliminate the most formidable-looking foes first. If more capable myconids join
the battle, elder workers use much the same tactics that
average workers do.
Spores (Ex): Elder workers have access to distress, reproduction, and rapport spores (save DC 12 where applicable).
GUARD
These myconids are sixteen to twenty years old. They are
charged with the defense of the circle.
Combat
Guards are fairly aggressive in combat, at least by myconid standards. Their preferred attack is their pacification spores, though
they can use their slam attacks if forced into melee.
MYCONID
Myconid Guard Myconid Circle Leader Myconid Sovereign
Medium-Size Plant Large Plant Large Plant
Hit Dice: 4d8+8 (26 hp) 5d8+15 (37 hp) 6d8+21 (48 hp)
Initiative: +1 +1 +1
Speed: 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 12 (+1 Dex, +1 natural), 12 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +2 natural), 12 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +2 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 11 touch 10, flat-footed 11 touch 10, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 slams +5 melee, or spores 2 slams +5 melee, or spores 2 slams +7 melee, or spores
+5 ranged touch +6 ranged touch +8 ranged touch
Damage: Slam 1d6+2 Slam 1d8+3 Slam 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Spores Spores Spores
Special Qualities: Plant traits, spores Plant traits, spores Plant traits, potion making, spores
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +2, Will +3 Fort +7, Ref +2, Will +4 Fort +8, Ref +3, Will +5
Abilities: Str 14, Dex 12, Con 15, Str 16, Dex 12, Con 17, Str 18, Dex 12, Con 17,
Int 11, Wis 15, Cha 14 Int 11, Wis 16, Cha 15 Int 12, Wis 17, Cha 17
Skills: Craft (any one) +4, Hide +5, Craft (any one) +4, Diplomacy Craft (any one) +5, Diplomacy
Intimidate +6, Knowledge +4, Hide +1, Intimidate +6, +5, Hide +1, Intimidate +8,
(nature) +4, Listen +8, Move Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen Knowledge (nature) +5, Listen
Silently +4, Profession (farmer) +9, Move Silently +4, Profession +9, Move Silently +4, Profession
+6, Sense Motive +6, Spot +8, (farmer) +8, Sense Motive +8, (farmer) +8, Profession
Wilderness Lore +6 Spot +9, Wilderness Lore +7 (herbalist) +7, Sense Motive +8,
Spot +9, Wilderness Lore +7
Feats: Alertness Alertness, Alertness, Brew Potion (B),
Weapon Focus (spores) Toughness, Weapon Focus
(spores)
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, patrol (3–5), Solitary, pair, patrol (3–5), work Tribe (3–10 circles, plus
or work gang (3–5 plus 3–5 gang (3–5 plus 3–5 workers), 1 king and 5–10 zombie
workers) or circle (4 junior workers plus servants)
average workers, elder workers,
guards, and elder guards, for a total of 20)
Challenge Rating: 4 6 7
Treasure: None None No coins, no goods, standard
items (potions only)
Alignment: Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral
Advancement: — — 7–12 HD (Large); 13–18 HD (Huge)Spores (Ex): Guards have
access to distress, reproduction, rapport, and pacification spores (save DC 14
where applicable).
CIRCLE LEADER
These myconids are twenty
to twenty-four years old. As
the name suggests, they lead
and administer their circles.
Combat
Circle leaders join battle
only if doing so seems necessary to keep their underlings from being slaughtered. In combat, they use
their hallucination spores at
the first opportunity. Like
other myconids, they prefer
to avoid melee combat altogether but can use their
slams if they must.
Spores (Ex): Circle leaders have access to distress, reproduction, rapport, pacification,
and hallucination spores (save DC 15 where applicable).
SOVEREIGN
A myconid sovereign is usually at least twenty-four years
old. It rules over a tribe, advised by the oldest of the circle
leaders. Sovereigns in neighboring areas try to ensure regular communication between their tribes, and they occasionally meet to discuss issues that affect multiple tribes.
Combat
Sovereigns use the same tactics as circle leaders, except that
they also usually have a few myconid-animated zombies, or
servants, to order into combat. If they join combat at all,
sovereigns tend to advance on the enemy behind a rank of
servants or circle leaders or both.
Spores (Ex): A myconid sovereign has access to distress,
reproduction, rapport, pacification, hallucination, and animation spores (save DC 15 where applicable).
Potion Making (Su): Though it is not a spellcaster, a
myconid sovereign can create various potions that mimic
cleric and druid spells. It can duplicate the following
effects, each once per day (but only for the purpose of
brewing potions): bull’s strength, cure light wounds, cure moderate wounds, cure serious wounds, delay poison, endurance,
endure elements, greater magic fang, invisibility to animals, lesser
restoration, magic fang, negative energy protection, neutralize
poison, protection from elements, remove blindness/deafness,
remove disease, remove paralysis, resist elements. Caster level
6th; save DC 12 + spell level.
MYCONID SOCIETY
A circle of myconids contains equal numbers of 1-HD, 2-
HD, 3-HD, 4-HD, and 5-HD individuals. Each day is rigidly
structured into 8 hours of rest, 8 hours of work (tending
fungus farms), and 8 hours of melding into a transcendental, hallucinogenic, group-mind state. A melding can be
broken only by myconid distress spores.
Myconids grow fungus for food. A tribe usually maintains several fungus farms, which the workers tend with an
almost religious zeal. These creatures know everything
there is to know about fungus, including the optimum conditions for growing each type, and how large a crop a given
area might be expected to produce. Myconids also know
how to make various items from fungus. Most of these,
however, are useful only to myconids.
Myconid tribes consist of several circles living in close
proximity. The circles in a tribe usually arrange themselves
so that the distress spores from neighboring circles can
reach at least one member of another circle in the tribe.
A myconid encountered away from its circle is performing some mission for its superiors. Such missions usually
consist of keeping a lookout for intruders or scavenging
for refuse to fertilize the fungus beds. Should a wandering
myconid chance upon a humanoid body suitable for animation, it takes that back to its circle.
The sovereign is the only 6-HD myconid in a tribe. This
creature organizes the circles, watches over the tribe, protects it from outside influences, animates guardians, and
brews potions. When it dies, the oldest surviving circle
leader in that tribe becomes the new sovereign.
157
MYCONID158
NEEDLEFOLK
Medium-Size Plant
Hit Dice: 3d8+3 (16 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 14 (+4 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Needles +2 ranged, or 2 claws +3 melee
Damage: Needles 1d12+1, claw 1d4+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: Plant traits
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +1, Will +3
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 15,
Cha 5
Skills: Hide +0*
Climate/Terrain: Any forest
Organization: Solitary or grove (5–50)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Medium-size)
Though needlefolk superficially resemble humanoids,
they are in fact mobile plants. Because they lack roots,
needlefolk must take in water and nutrients through a
structure that resembles a mouth.
Under most circumstances a needlefolk’s movements are
slow and stately. When
faced with danger, however, it can be nearly as quick and agile as a human.
A needlefolk is a green, hairless bipedal creature whose body
is covered with short, stiff bristles (actually needlelike thorns).
In human terms, its body is quite thin, even emaciated-looking.
Its arms end in “hands” that sport vicious-looking claws (actually large, sturdy thorns). The coloration of the small leaves
that cover the monster’s body mirrors that of the foliage
around them: green in spring and summer, red and yellow in
autumn, and brown in winter. Needlefolk are deciduous, so
they drop their leaves and become dormant through the cold
season. A dormant needlefolk resembles a tree with two
branches and a faint outline of a face in the bark atop its body.
Needlefolk have no appreciable society or culture. They
live in the forest with no more social organization than trees
or shrubs would have. Their dietary needs are all satisfied by
absorbing light and by eating dirt, decaying leaves, and the
occasional small, dead forest animal. They reproduce by
seeds, which each needlefolk produces in the autumn. The
seed pods are brown and covered with spiny thorns. Because
they fall close to the parent plant, groves of needlefolk tend
to spring up wherever one has chosen to spend a season.
The only thing that excites needlefolk is elves—they hate
elves passionately. Needlefolk can sense the presence of an
elf within 1,500 feet, and they always move to attack when
one is detected. However, the monsters do possess enough
intelligence and cunning not to commit suicide if they can see
that the odds are strongly against them. If badly outnumbered,
a needlefolk may shadow the target elves until it can
see that enough additional needlefolk have gathered
in the area to shift the balance against the enemies.
Needlefolk speak Sylvan.
COMBAT
Needlefolk are not tremendous fighters at
close range; their preferred weapon
is the small needles that cover their
bodies. Each round, a needlefolk can
launch a cluster of needles from its body
(range increment 20 feet, maximum range
200 feet). The precise number of needles
launched doesn’t matter; either they all hit a
single target as a cluster and deal 1d12+1
points of damage, or they all miss. If forced into
melee, a needlefolk attacks with its claws.
Groups of needlefolk attack as individuals,
without any sort of plan or direction. Each one is
cunning enough to determine where its own
attacks might be best targeted, but it cares
nothing for what the rest of its kind do in a fight.
Plant Traits (Ex): Needlefolk are immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. They are not
subject to critical hits or mind-affecting effects. The
creatures also have low-light vision.
Skills: *A needlefolk’s coloration and needles give
it excellent camouflage in the forest. While there,
it has a +16 racial bonus on Hide checks when stationary. This bonus drops to +8 if it moves at up to half-speed.
NEOGI
Neogis are vicious, spiderlike scavengers, raiders, and slavers.
They fit right into any setting where creepy creatures abound.
A neogi’s eight-legged body is covered with stiff hair,
which makes it look something like a giant wolf spider.
Instead of a spider’s head, however, the neogi has a long,
flexible neck that extends upward and backward, then turns
toward the front again in a large S-curve. Atop that sleek
neck sits a small, narrow head, like that of an eel. Its jaws are
lined with tiny, needle-sharp teeth, and small, black eyes are
pushed well forward on the face. An occasional individual
has a narrow beard growing from the front edge of its chin.
The typical neogi dyes its naturally tan fur in one of many
different hues and patterns. Some of these patterns signify
family or rank; others are just for decoration. A neogi usually wears simple articles of decorative clothing and a belt
or bandoleer with pouches for carrying its valuables.
Neogi lairs are usually laced with pits, chasms, narrow
bridges, and precarious ledges. With their excellent balance
and jumping skills and their ability to dash around enemies,
neogis can move through these hazardous areas more
quickly and safely than most attackers can.
NEEDLEFOLK
TDAll neogis speak Common and Undercommon, and a
large number of them also speak Terran.
COMBAT
The tactics of these monsters vary according to the kind of
neogi involved. No neogi is particularly brave, but all of
them are ruthless. They all share the following abilities.
Poison (Ex): Neogi poison is exceptionally virulent, considering that the creature itself is so frail. A neogi delivers
its poison (Fortitude save DC 14 for all neogis) with each
successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is
the same (1d4 points of Wisdom damage).
Immune to Mind-Affecting Effects: Neogis are
immune to all mind-affecting effects.
Skills: A neogi uses its Dexterity score instead of its
Strength score for Climb and Jump checks.
SPAWN
These foul and dangerous pests usually are found only in the
vicinity of a great old master. Sometimes, however, adult
neogis let large numbers of spawn loose on the outskirts of
their community and leave them to fend for themselves.
Combat
Neogi spawn usually prey on each other, but if they notice
other prey, they charge toward it. In combat, they swarm
over a single creature, biting until it succumbs to their
poison. Thereafter, these little horrors devour their prey.
ADULT NEOGI
Adult neogis are the backbone of the community. They
spend most of their time trying to acquire as much wealth
and power as possible.
Combat
Adult neogis are not tremendous fighters, and they know it.
Wherever possible, they have their umber hulk slaves (see
Neogi Society, below) fight for them while they linger
nearby looking for opportunities to use their enslave ability.
Adult neogis often try to make foes more vulnerable to
159
NEOGI
Neogi Spawn Adult Neogi Great Old Master Neogi
Tiny Aberration Small Aberration Huge Vermin
Hit Dice: 1/4 d8–1 (1 hp) 5d8–5 (18 hp) 5d8+25 (47 hp)
Initiative: +3 +3 –1
Speed: 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 30 ft., climb 20 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 size, +3 Dex), 17 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), 10 (–2 size, –1 Dex, +3 natural),
touch 15, flat-footed 12 touch 14, flat-footed 14 touch 7, flat-footed 10
Attacks: Bite +5 melee Bite +7 melee and 2 claws –3 melee, Bite +1 melee
or light crossbow +7 ranged
Damage: Bite 1d3–4 plus poison Bite 1d6–2 , claw 1d3–2, Bite 1d6
light crossbow 1d8/19–20
Space/Reach: 2 /2 ft by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison Enslave, poison Poison, spit spawn
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., immune Darkvision 60 ft., immune Vermin traits
to mind-affecting effects to mind-affecting effects
Saves: Fort –1, Ref +3, Will +2 Fort +0, Ref +4, Will +6 Fort +9, Ref +0, Will +3
Abilities: Str 3, Dex 17, Con 9 Str 6, Dex 17, Con 9 Str 11, Dex 8, Con 20
Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 2 Int 15, Wis 14, Cha 16 Int —, Wis 15, Cha 1
Skills: Balance +4, Climb +11, Balance +11, Climb +11, Disable Balance +3, Move Silently +7
Jump +4, Move Silently +5 Device +10, Intimidate +9,
Jump +11, Move Silently +11
Feats: Weapon Finesse (bite) (B) Dodge, Mobility, Simple Weapon —
Proficiency, Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate or warm land Any temperate or warm land Any temperate or warm land
and underground and underground and underground
Organization: Swarm (10–40) or tribe Nest (3–8 plus 3–8 umber Tribe (1 plus 10–60 spawn,
(10–60 plus 10–60 adult hulk slaves) 10–60 adult neogi, and 10–60
neogi, 10–60 umber hulk umber hulk slaves)
slaves, and 1 great old master)
Challenge Rating: 1/4 4 6
Treasure: None Double standard None
Alignment: Usually lawful evil Usually lawful evil Always neutral
Advancement: — By character class —160
enslavement by using their poison first, usually delivered
via a crossbow bolt (see below). These creatures are nimble
and difficult to corner.
Poison (Ex): As a standard action, an adult neogi can coat
a weapon with poison from its fangs. The poison remains
active for 1 minute after application and functions as it does
when delivered by means of a bite.
Enslave (Su): Three times a day, a neogi can attempt to enslave any one living creature within 30 feet. This ability functions similarly to a dominate monster spell (caster level 16th;
Will save DC 15). An enslaved creature obeys the neogi’s telepathic commands to the letter. The subject can attempt a new
Will save (DC 15) every 24 hours to break free. Otherwise,
the neogi’s control is broken only by the death of
either the neogi or the enslaved creature,
or by a remove curse or dispel magic effect,
or if the neogi travels more than 1 mile
from the enslaved creature.
This ability is not needed for neogis
to subdue or control their umber hulk
slaves (see Neogi Society, below).
GREAT OLD MASTER
A neogi that has grown old and
senile is used as an incubator for
infant neogi. In preparation for
this event, adult neogis exude
a fluid and inject it into the
subject. This fluid causes
the subject’s body to swell
into a 10-foot-diameter, bloated sack.
Upon becoming a great old master, a neogi
loses its intellect, memories, feats, magical abilities, and most
skills. Its type changes to vermin. When the transformation is
complete, adult neogis lay their eggs in the great old master’s
abdomen. Thereafter, the adult neogis provide the great old
master with food—usually alive but immobilized—to sustain
it and nourish the embryos that are devouring their host from
the inside out. Eventually, twenty to forty neogi spawn chew
their way out of the dying master. Most of these are in turn
eaten by their voracious, newborn brothers and sisters, but a
few survive to become the next generation of adult neogis.
Combat
A great old master can do little in combat except lurch
about, biting and spewing forth spawn.
Spit Spawn (Ex): As a standard action, a great old master
can spit out 2d4 spawn, which can attack the moment they
land. The great old master can place the spawn anywhere
within a range of 100 feet, but no two spawn can land more
than 30 feet apart.
Also, when a great old master takes damage, it can release
2d4 spawn. This version of the spit spawn ability is usable
once per round as a free action.
Vermin Traits: A great old master is immune to all mindaffecting effects (charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns,
and morale effects). It also has darkvision (60-foot range).
NEOGI SOCIETY
There’s nothing to admire about neogi culture. These creatures
are vicious murderers, plunderers, and slavers.
Perhaps they kill to eat and enslave whatever is left over, or maybe they fill their
chain gangs with slaves and eat whatever
is left over. Either way, their rapacity has
made them the enemies of every thinking
race in the world. Only the mind flayers are
known to have dealings with neogis, usually over the buying and selling of slaves.
Of all the races that neogis enslave,
umber hulks are their favorites. Every neogi
possesses at least one umber hulk, raised
from birth to a life of slavery and conditioned to accept that situation as the natural order. These umber hulk slaves take
orders from any neogi without question or
thought. Umber hulk guards keep less compliant slaves (those under the effect of the
neogi’s enalave ability) under control and also act as soldiers in
neogi armies and slave raids.
In the neogis’ worldview,
ownership is what fuels the universe. Everything belongs to the
neogis as a whole—if not now, then
it did in the past or it will in the
future. Even a neogi can be owned as a slave by another neogi,
and the slaves can own property and slaves, and those slaves
can own property and other slaves, and so on.
NEOGI CHARACTERS
Many neogis become wizards or sorcerers. A neogi’s favored
class is sorcerer.
A neogi PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its
class level + 8. Thus, a 1st-level neogi sorcerer has an ECL
of 9 and is the equivalent of a 9th-level character.
NETHERSIGHT MASTIFF
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+30 (85 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 15 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Bite +13 melee
Damage: Bite 2d6+6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, wrenching attack
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., ethereal bite, lowlight vision, scent, true sight
NETHERSIGHT
MASTIFF
MCSaves: Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +6
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 12
Skills: Jump +9, Listen +9, Spot +8*, Wilderness Lore +5
Feats: Alertness, Improved Initiative, Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Any cold or temperate land
Organization: Solitary or pack (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 8
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–30 HD (Huge)
Nethersight mastiffs are fierce predators native to arctic and
subarctic areas of the Material Plane. These imposing, muscular canines have a taste for ethereal flesh, and they pursue
it zealously, often passing over easier Material Plane prey in
favor of a hunt on the Ethereal Plane.
A nethersight mastiff resembles a tremendous dire wolf
with a black, shaggy coat and huge paws. It has a broad head
with a short, wide muzzle, and its teeth glow with a pearly
blue light. The typical nethersight mastiff is 8 feet in length
and weighs 700 pounds.
Nethersight mastiffs speak Common.
COMBAT
Nethersight mastiffs are bold, aggressive carnivores that
usually hunt in large packs, surrounding their prey to prevent
escape, and then closing in for the kill. Because ethereal
prey is more difficult to catch than Material Plane creatures,
mastiffs always attack quickly and
hold on with their jaws.
Improved Grab (Ex):
If a nethersight mastiff hits
an opponent that is at
least one size category
smaller than itself
with a bite attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to
start a grapple as a
free action without provoking
an attack of
opportunity
(grapple bonus +18). If it gets a hold on an ethereal creature,
it can attempt a wrenching attack on the next round. Alternatively, the nethersight mastiff has the option to conduct
the grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the
opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the nethersight mastiff is not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Wrenching Attack (Su): A nethersight mastiff can
wrench a grabbed ethereal opponent onto the Material
Plane by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus
+18). A wrenched opponent is then trapped on the Material
Plane unless it has the means to return to the Ethereal Plane.
Ethereal Bite (Su): A nethersight mastiff ’s teeth have
abilities similar to those of a ghost touch weapon, allowing it
to bite ethereal creatures and negating the usual miss
chance on any attack against an incorporeal creature.
Scent (Ex): A nethersight mastiff can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
True Seeing (Su): This ability functions like the true seeing
spell (caster level 16th), except that it is continuously active.
Skills: *A nethersight mastiff receives a +5 racial bonus
on Spot checks when hunting creatures that are on the
Ethereal Plane.
NIGHTMARE BEAST
Huge Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 15d10+105 (187 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 21 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +12 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 20
Attacks: 2 tusks +22 melee and 2 claws +20 melee and bite
+20 melee
Damage: Tusk 4d6+9/18–20, claw 2d4+4/19–20, bite
4d6+4/19–20
Space/Reach: 20 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Nightmares, spell-like abilities, trample
4d6+13
Special Qualities: Augmented critical, darkvision 60 ft.,
DR 15/+1, low-light vision, SR 20
Saves: Fort +16, Ref +10, Will +6
Abilities: Str 28, Dex 13, Con 24, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 11
Skills: Jump +24, Spot +13
Feats: Improved Critical (tusk), Multiattack, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 15
Treasure: 1/10th coins; 50% goods; 50% items
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 16–30 HD (Huge); 31–45 HD (Gargantuan)
With a disposition as bad as its reputation, it’s no wonder
that a nightmare beast spreads terror wherever it goes.
161
NIGHTMARE
BEAST162
A nightmare beast stands at least 20 feet tall
on its four legs. Each of its digits is tipped with a 3-foot-long
claw. Its jaws are filled with 1-foot-long teeth and flanked by
curved tusks the size of cavalry lances. A nightmare beast’s
thick, tough hide is typically dark gray with dark blue, purple,
or brown splotches in between patches of bony material. Its
red eyes, each the size of a man’s head, glow in the dark.
The nightmare beast prefers to lair in a remote cave. It
spends most of its time in search of food, and it tends to
hunt in one area until the food supply is exhausted. At that
point, it usually hibernates for up to one year, then awakens
again in a ravenous state.
This monster has no interest in treasure, nor does it often
bring any prey back to its lair, unless the kill is so large that it
cannot be consumed all at once. A nightmare beast often inadvertently eats treasures along with their owners, so occasionally items of value turn up in the creature’s lair at a later time.
Nightmare beasts speak Abyssal.
Combat
Few monsters aside from dragons are as dangerous as a
nightmare beast. The creature attacks anything that looks
like food with its teeth, tusks, and claws, dealing massive
amounts of damage by means of its augmented critical ability. And in spite of all that damage potential, its most dangerous weapons are its spell-like abilities.
Nightmares (Su): Perhaps the nightmare beast’s most
powerful weapon is the one from which its name is derived.
Every intelligent creature that falls asleep within 10 miles
of a nightmare beast must succeed at a Will save (DC 17) or
suffer from horrid, vivid nightmares of being stalked and
killed by monsters, demons, cruel enemies, or whatever else
it fears. The effect is otherwise the same as that of a nightmare
spell (caster level 15th; Will save DC 17), except that a dispel
evil spell cast on a victim does not stun the nightmare beast. A
remove curse or a successful dispel magic negates the effect.
Once a creature has either been affected by this ability or
made a successful save, it cannot be affected by that nightmare beast’s nightmare power again for 24 hours.
Spell-Like Abilities: 2/day—chain lightning, cloudkill,
dimension door (1,000 ft. range), disintegrate, dispel magic, fireball,
heat metal, incendiary cloud, lightning bolt, monster summoning V,
wall of fire. Caster level 10th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a nightmare beast can trample opponents at least one
size category smaller than itself by making a running jump
from up to 35 feet away. This attack deals 4d6+13 points of
bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 26) for half damage.
Augmented Critical (Ex): A nightmare beast threatens a critical hit on a natural attack roll of 19–20 with any
of its natural weapons.
NIMBLEWRIGHT
Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 10d10 (55 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 24 (+7 Dex, +7 natural), touch 17, flat-footed 17
Attacks: 2 rapier-hands +11 melee
Damage: Rapier-hand 2d6+4/12–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities, tripping thrust
Special Qualities: Augmented critical, construct traits,
SR 27, vulnerabilities
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +10, Will +6
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 24, Con —, Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 19
Feats: Combat Reflexes (B), Dodge (B), Expertise (B),
Improved Disarm (B), Mobility (B), Spring Attack (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Medium-size); 16–30 HD (Large)
Nimblewrights are rapier-wielding constructs that disguise
themselves as living humanoids. They often serve as hired
bodyguards, but many are employed to infiltrate organizations and secret societies or spy on individuals. Unlike most
constructs, a nimblewright is created with intelligence and
NIMBLEWRIGHTa distinct personality
that allows for intuitive
thinking and responsiveness.
Like a golem, a nimblewright is a
powerful creation that combines awesome magic with elemental forces. Its animating force is a spirit from the Elemental Plane of Water. The
process of creating a nimblewright binds the unwilling spirit
to the artificial body and subjects it to the will of the creator.
An undisguised nimblewright appears as a nondescript,
steel-colored, mechanical human. When disguised, it wears
clothes and uses spells to hide its true nature. In this way, it
can appear as almost any Medium-size humanoid it wishes
to become.
Nimblewrights speak Common, Elven, and Dwarven.
COMBAT
A nimblewright is an extremely dexterous combatant. In
battle, it brings to bear all of its special fighting skills to deprive
opponents of their weapons before running them through. If a
nimblewright has ample warning of a fight, it enhances its
combat skills with cat’s grace and haste before joining melee.
The monster fights with two rapiers that are actually parts
of its body. These rapiers are treated as natural weapons.
When not in use, the weapons fold into its forearms. A
nimblewright can fully deploy both rapiers as a free action.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—alter self, cat’s grace, entropic
shield, feather fall, haste. Caster level 10th; save DC 14 +
spell level.
Tripping Thrust (Ex): A nimblewright’s rapier-hand
attacks are powerful enough to push over creatures its own
size or smaller. An opponent who is the target of a successful
critical hit from a nimblewright must make a Reflex save
(DC 19) or be knocked prone as if tripped.
Augmented Critical (Ex): A nimblewright threatens a critical hit on a natural attack roll of 12–20. On a successful critical hit, its foe is subject to a tripping thrust attack (see above).
Construct Traits: A nimblewright is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires
a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage,
ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death
from massive damage. It cannot heal itself but can be
healed through repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected.
A nimblewright has darkvision (60-foot range).
Vulnerabilities: A cold effect slows a nimblewright for 3 rounds, and a fire effect stuns it for 1 round.
CONSTRUCTION
A nimblewright’s body is a hollow humanoid shell made of
flexible precious metal alloys weighing 500 pounds. It costs
35,000 gp to create, which includes 15,000 gp for the body.
Assembling the body requires a successful Craft (sculpting)
or Profession (mason) check (DC 16). The creator must be
18th level and able to cast arcane spells. Completing the
ritual drains 1,600 XP from the creator and requires the
geas/quest, haste, limited wish, and polymorph any object spells.
OCEAN STRIDER
Huge Fey (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 30d6+60 (165 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft., swim 60 ft.
AC: 19 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Gargantuan masterwork falchion +18/+13/+8
melee and tail slap +12 melee, or Gargantuan masterwork trident +18/+13/+8 melee and tail slap +12 melee,
or tail slap +17 melee
Damage: Gargantuan masterwork falchion 2d8+6/18–20,
Gargantuan masterwork trident 4d6+6, tail slap 1d6+2
(secondary) or 1d6+6 (primary)
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 5 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Frightful presence, ramming, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: DR 30/+3, low-light vision, SR 28,
water breathing, water walk
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +18, Will +23
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 13, Con 15, Int 16, Wis 22, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +12, Intimidate +23, Intuit Direction +16, Jump
+13, Listen +26, Spot +26, Swim +12, Wilderness Lore +16
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Cleave, Dodge, Expertise,
Improved Initiative, Mobility, Power Attack, Spring
Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 18
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: By character class
163
CHAPTER
TITLE164
Ocean striders live to protect the seas and oceans from those
who sail upon them. These immense fey consider themselves defenders of natural waterways, and they dislike
anyone who would plunder the depths for personal gain.
An ocean strider resembles a 20-foot-tall cross between an
elf and a killer whale. Like an orca, it has a mouth full of
pointed teeth, rubbery skin, black and white markings on its
body, and a stubby, fluked tail. Like an elf, it has two arms,
two legs, and a humanoid face. The typical ocean strider
wears mithral scale mail and carries a masterwork falchion
or trident sized for its convenient use.
Because of its water walk ability, an ocean strider can
move at its land speed over the surface of the ocean as
well as the bottom. Its name is derived from the
majestic picture it makes striding over the wave
tops, its weapon raised in defiance.
Once an ocean strider claims a particular
stretch of water, it considers all creatures
not native to those waters, or to the
skies above, to be intruders. It
begins by approaching ships
that enter its realm and ordering them to turn back or face
destruction. Usually, an ocean
strider is content to allow ships’
crews to reverse course, or even to
negotiate if they wish. Those who
promise to travel carefully, without
dumping their trash overboard or
killing more fish than they can eat,
can sometimes negotiate safe
passage with an ocean strider.
Only when an intruder attempts to
sail past without parleying or
attacks does the ocean strider
become openly aggressive. But
woe to those who behave properly
only until they believe themselves
out of danger, because ocean striders have been known to follow
ships for many miles if they have doubts about a crew’s commitment to proper use of the ocean’s gifts. Many a ship’s captain has tried to persuade an ocean strider to reveal the limits
of its demesne, but these canny sea-dwellers prefer to not to
let intruders know the true extent of their ability to observe
and punish wrongdoers.
Ocean striders speak Common, Elven, and Aquan.
COMBAT
In battle, an ocean strider first uses its powerful spell-like abilities to confuse, disorient, and soften up opponents. Then it
uses the Spring Attack feat to enter combat with its weapon.
Frightful Presence (Ex): The mere presence of an ocean
strider inspires terror in all creatures within 100 feet of it that
have fewer Hit Dice or levels than it has. Each potentially
affected opponent must succeed at a Will save (DC 32) or
become shaken—a condition that lasts until the opponent is
out of range. A successful save leaves that opponent immune
to that ocean strider’s frightful presence for 24 hours.
Ramming (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, an ocean strider can swim at up to quadruple speed
(240 feet) and ram a waterborne target (such as a ship or
another creature). To ram, the ocean strider
must end its movement in the target’s space.
This attack deals 2d8+6 points of damage. If the
target is a creature, it can attempt either an attack of
opportunity or a Reflex save (DC 29) for half damage.
Upon ramming a ship, the ocean strider can make a
Strength check to breach its hull, which causes the ship
to sink in 1d10 minutes. The break DC varies
with the type of vessel rammed, as follows:
rowboat DC 20, keelboat DC 23, sailing
ship or longship DC 25, warship DC 27,
or galley DC 30. (See Chapter 5 of the
DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide for information
about ships.) Regardless of the check result,
every creature aboard must attempt a
Reflex saving throw (DC 15). Success
means the creature takes 1d10 points of
damage from being thrown about by
the impact; failure means the creature is hurled overboard.
Spell-Like Abilities: 6/day—
control water, fog cloud, ice
storm, obscuring mist; 5/day—
acid fog, cone of cold, elemental swarm
(water only), horrid wilting, summon
nature’s ally IX (water or aquatic
creatures only). Caster level 20th;
save DC 17 + spell level.
Water Breathing (Ex): An
ocean strider has gills as well as
lungs, so it can breathe water as
well as it can air.
Water Walk (Su): An ocean
strider continuously produces an effect like
that of a water walk spell (caster level 20th).
OCEAN STRIDER CHARACTERS
An ocean strider’s preferred class is ranger, though many
choose to become clerics. Ocean strider clerics worship
Deep Sashelas and may choose any two of the following
domains: Chaos, Protection, and Water. Claims by sea captains that they have encountered shadowdancer ocean striders remain unconfirmed.
An ocean strider PC’s effective character level (ECL) is
equal to its class level + 35. Thus, a 1st-level ocean strider
ranger has an ECL of 36 and is the equivalent of a 36thlevel character.
OCEAN
STRIDERORCWORT
An orcwort is a walking, bloodthirsty terror that prefers to
make its home on the
fringe of a populated area.
This giant plant wanders
by night until it finds an
appropriate spot to settle,
then sinks some of its
roots into the ground,
making it seem that an
immense tree has grown
up in the spot overnight.
Over the course of the next
week, the orcwort produces
five to twenty pods that,
when mature, break open to
release mobile fruits called
wortlings. The parent plant
then sends out its wortlings in hunting parties to
bring back warm-blooded
sustenance—usually livestock and humanoids.
An orcwort is capable of
devouring the entire population of a small village
in a single feeding. Once
it has stripped an area of
warm-blooded animal life, it moves on in search
of other population centers.
COMBAT
Both the orcwort and its wortlings
are effective combatants. They
share the following qualities.
Partial Immunity to Piercing (Ex): Piercing weapons deal
only half damage to orcworts
and wortlings. The minimum
damage per hit with such a
weapon is 1 point.
Plant Traits (Ex): An orcwort
or wortling is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or mind-affecting effects.
Woodsense (Ex): An orcwort or
wortling can automatically sense the
location of anything within 60 feet
that is in contact with vegetation,
even objects or creatures that are
not in contact with the same
vegetation as itself.
Skills and Feats: Orcworts
and wortlings gain skills and
feats as though they were fey.
165
ORCWORT
Wortling Orcwort
Small Plant Colossal Plant
Hit Dice: 3d8 (13 hp) 32d8+288 (432 hp)
Initiative: +6 +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 15 ft. 10 ft.
AC: 16 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +3 natural), 12 (–8 size, –2 Dex, +12 natural),
touch 13, flat-footed 14 touch 0, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 claws +5 melee 6 slams +30 melee
Damage: Claw 1d3+2 plus poison Slam 4d6+14
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 40 ft. by 40 ft./25 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison, swarming Entangling roots, improved grab, paralysis,
swallow whole
Special Qualities: Partial immunity to piercing, DR 5/–, partial immunity to piercing, plant
plantmind, plant traits, woodsense traits, telepathy, woodsense
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +1 Fort +27, Ref +8, Will +13
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 14, Con 11, Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 6 Str 39, Dex 7, Con 29, Int 10, Wis 16, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +10, Hide +11, Move Silently +7 Hide –3, Move Silently +13
Feats: Improved Initiative Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm plains, hills, and marsh Temperate or warm plains, hills, and marsh
Organization: Band (5–20) Crop (1 orcwort plus 5–20 wortlings)
Challenge Rating: 3 20
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Medium-size) 33–64 HD (Colossal)166
WORTLING
Wortlings are the mature fruits of the orcwort plant. When
one of the orcwort’s pods ripens, it falls to the ground and
breaks open to release a wortling.
When first “hatched,” a wortling resembles a small,
wrinkled, purple orc. Its body seems portly, and its arms
and legs are somewhat lumpy compared with those of a
real humanoid. Although its face resembles that of a
humanoid, a wortling is blind and cannot speak, hear, or
smell—its apparent sensory organs are merely blobs of
plant tissue with no actual function.
A hungry orcwort dispatches up to twenty of its “ripe”
wortlings at a time to hunt food and bring it back. The
wortlings navigate terrain using their woodsense. When on
the prowl, wortlings seek out Medium-size or smaller prey
because such creatures are easier to transport back to the
parent plant than larger creatures.
The average life span of a wortling is 1d4+1 days. If any
wortlings are left alive when the parent plant is ready to
move on, the orcwort commands them to arrange themselves well apart from each other at the extreme range of
its telepathy and root themselves. If left undisturbed for
one year, each of these wortlings grows into a new orcwort, which pulls up its roots and begins looking for food.
During its maturation period, a rooted wortling is immobile and helpless.
Combat
Wortlings use very simple tactics—overwhelm, subdue,
and return with the food. In melee, they prefer to gang up
on one foe rather than attack separate enemies. They fight
with a great sense of urgency, and when they do manage to
bring down a foe, a few of them immediately carry off their
prize to feed the orcwort, leaving any remaining wortlings
to continue the hunt. They never willingly enter areas without natural vegetation because they are effectively blind in
such places.
Poison (Ex): A wortling delivers its poison (Fortitude
save DC 11) with each successful claw attack. The initial
damage is sleep for 1 minute, and the secondary damage is
sleep for 1d10 minutes. Both of these sleep effects work only
against living creatures but otherwise function as the spell
of the same name.
Swarming (Ex): Wortlings can swarm over and around
each other with ease, so up to three of them can occupy the
same 5-foot-by-5-foot space. They are likewise adept at
attacking as a group; for every wortling that is grappling a
foe (grapple bonus +0), every wortling gets a +1 competence
bonus on attack rolls against that foe.
Plantmind (Ex): All wortlings within fifteen miles of
their orcwort parent are in constant communication. If
one is aware of a particular danger, they all are. If one in a
particular group is not flat-footed, none of them are. No
wortling in such a group is considered flanked unless they
all are.
ORCWORT
An orcwort looks like a gigantic, woody pitcher plant
draped in thick creeper vines. It is crowned with a canopy
of bramblelike branches and green, bushy foliage. Dormant wortling pods hang from the orcwort’s branches,
resembling round, oversized prunes.
Combat
In combat, an orcwort reaches out with its vines to entwine
nearby prey. It then uses other tendrils to pick out choice
victims one at a time and drop them into its open maw. An
orcwort recalls any wortling raiding parties it has sent out
whenever it is under attack.
Entangling Roots (Ex): As a free action, an orcwort can
twist its roots around all creatures within 15 feet of it, holding them fast. This effect otherwise functions like an entangle spell (caster level 10th; save DC 24).
Improved Grab (Ex): If an orcwort hits a Gargantuan or
smaller opponent with a slam attack, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +54). If it
gets a hold, it can transfer the opponent to its maw in the
next round. Alternatively, the orcwort has the option to
conduct the grapple normally, or simply use one tendril to
hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
orcwort is not considered grappled). In either case, each
successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Paralysis (Ex): An orcwort secretes digestive juices that
can paralyze creatures in contact with it. Any creature swallowed by an orcwort must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
35) or be paralyzed for 2d4 rounds.
Swallow Whole (Ex): An orcwort can swallow a Huge
or smaller creature by making a successful grapple check
(grapple bonus +54), provided it already has that opponent
in its maw (see Improved Grab, above). Once inside the
orcwort’s pitcher, the opponent takes 2d8+8 points of acid
damage per round and is subject to the paralyzing effect of
its digestive juices (see Paralysis, above). A successful grapple check allows a swallowed creature to climb out of the
pitcher (assuming it is not paralyzed) and return to the orcwort’s maw, where another successful grapple check is
needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can
try to cut its way out with either claws or a light piercing or
slashing weapon. Dealing at least 20 points of damage to
the pitcher (AC 18) in this way creates an opening large
enough to permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature
exits, muscular action closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. The orcwort’s
pitcher can hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128
Small or smaller creatures.
Telepathy (Su): An orcwort can communicate telepathically with any of its wortlings within fifteen miles.
ORCWORTORMYRR
Huge Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 7d8+21 (52 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 20 ft., swim 40 ft.
AC: 17 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 4 claws +13 melee and bite +8 melee, or weapon
+13/+8 melee and 3 light weapons +13 melee and bite +8
melee, or weapon +11/+6 melee and 3 weapons (at least
one of which is not light) +11 melee and bite +8 melee,
or 4 stones +5 ranged
Damage: Claw 2d4+8, by weapon (damage bonus +8 for
primary hand and +4 for each off hand), bite 1d8+4,
stone 1d6+8 (primary hand) or 1d6+4 (off hand)
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 25 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 1d8+12, improved grab
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., enhanced multiweapon fighting, weapon use
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +6
Abilities: Str 26, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 11, Wis 12, Cha 13
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) +9, Listen +11, Spellcraft +9,
Swim +16
Feats: Multidexterity, Multiweapon Fighting (B)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm aquatic (rivers,
lakes, and the shores of both)
Organization: Solitary, pair, or tribe (6–12)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually lawful neutral
Advancement: 8–14 HD (Huge);
15–21 HD (Gargantuan)
Ormyrrs are intelligent, seminomadic
creatures that live
in small settlements
along muddy river
banks and lake
shores. For the
most part, they
keep to themselves,
except while hunting or feeding their passion for acquiring
magic items.
An ormyrr has an enormous, grublike body that can measure as much as 25 feet long. At the top of the body is a froglike
head that appears impossibly large and heavy. Below the head,
four short but powerful arms extend out from the body. Thick,
bony ridges above the eyes and a wide mouth filled with serrated teeth complete the beast’s monstrous appearance.
Hunting parties of ormyrrs can roam as far as 40 miles
from their homes. They travel by river as much as possible
during their forays, then come ashore for the actual hunt.
Ormyrrs have no magical ability at all, but magic fascinates them; in fact, their goal as a race is to develop a unique
ormyrr magic. They covet magic and magic items, and the
chance to take possession of a magic item, scroll, or book is
the one thing that can make one of these normally reasonable creatures lie, steal, or attack without provocation.
Needless to say, this tendency can draw them into conflict
with adventurers. Since they are innately lawful, however,
those seeking to recover magic items that ormyrrs have
stolen can sometimes get farther by appealing to the creatures’ sense of right and wrong than by attacking, hurling
accusations, or trying to steal the items back.
Ormyrrs speak Common.
COMBAT
Most often, ormyrrs fight with weapons rather than with
their claws. The typical ormyrr possesses at least one
magic weapon, usually with a +1 or +2 enhancement
bonus, and fights with more than one weapon at once to
take advantage of its enhanced multiweapon fighting special quality.
A preferred tactic among ormyrrs is to hide along a river
bank and ambush enemies with a hail of hurled stones, sling
stones, axes, and nets. If the situation looks
promising, the ormyrrs close in with
drawn weapons. If not, they
simply slip into the river and
swim away from danger.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, an ormyrr
can crush a grabbed opponent,
dealing 1d8+12
points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex):
If an ormyrr hits an opponent
that is at least one size category
smaller than itself with two claw
attacks, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple
as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus
+23). If it gets a hold, it also constricts on the same round.
Thereafter, the ormyrr has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its claws to hold the opponent
(–20 penalty on grapple check, but the ormyrr is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check
it makes during successive rounds automatically deals
damage for two claw attacks.
Enhanced Multiweapon Fighting (Ex): This ability
lessens the penalty for off-hand weapon use by 2 for both
primary and off hands. Thus, when combined with the
creature’s Multidexterity and Multiweapon Fighting feats,
it allows the use of one or more light off-hand weapons with
no penalty on the attack rolls.
Weapon Use (Ex): An ormyrr is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons.
167
ORMYRR168
PHASE WASP
Tiny Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 2d10 (11 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 10 ft., fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 17 (+2 size, +4 Dex, +1 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Sting +0 melee
Damage: Sting 1d4–4
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Magic missile
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, see
invisibility
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +7, Will +2
Abilities: Str 3, Dex 19, Con 10, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 6
Skills: Listen +6, Spot +6, Wilderness Lore +3
Feats: Alertness
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate or warm land
Organization: Swarm (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 3–4 HD (Tiny); 5–6 HD (Small)
Phase wasps are 18-inch-long insects that can see and attack
invisible and ethereal creatures (in the latter case, without crossing the planar boundary). They rarely attack creatures three or
more size categories larger than themselves unless provoked.
Like ordinary wasps, these creatures live in large colonies.
Each colony builds a nest about 10 feet in diameter
out of “paper” that its members
have made from chewed-up wood or paper and their own
saliva. Because such a nest requires a tremendous amount of
paper, many wizards and libraries offer bounties for the
destruction of nearby phase wasp nests.
Though they do not speak, phase wasps utilize an elaborate signaling system to communicate within their hives.
Their “signal language” seems to be based on a system of
subtle smells, body postures, and flight patterns.
COMBAT
Normally, phase wasps attack only to defend themselves or
their nests. They converge on intruders in swarms, fire
their magic missiles, and then swoop in to sting until they
can use their missiles again.
Magic Missile (Sp): A phase wasp can produce an effect
that functions like a magic missile spell (caster level 3rd).
Once it has used this ability, it must wait 1d4 rounds before
it can do so again.
See Invisibility (Sp): A phase wasp produces an effect like
that of a see invisibility spell (caster level 3rd), except that is
always active.
PHOENIX
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 20d10+40 (150 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: 15 ft., fly 200 ft. (average)
AC: 23 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +6 natural, +5 deflection), touch
17, flat-footed 23
Attacks: 2 claws +23 melee, or bite +23 melee
Damage: Claw 1d8+4/19–20, bite 2d6+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 15 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Shriek, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., defensive aura, DR
20/+3, immolation, low-light vision, planar travel, spelllike metamagic, SR 35, telepathy, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +15, Will +11
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 15, Int 18, Wis 17, Cha 21
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) +20, Knowledge (history) +20,
Spot +25
Feats: Empower Spell, Enlarge Spell, Extend Spell, Flyby
Attack, Heighten Spell, Improved Critical (claw),
Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Maximize Spell
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 24
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral good
Advancement: —
The phoenix, or firebird, is a creature of tremendous power
and potent omen. Many intelligent races look upon it as a
god, or at least as a god’s messenger.
PHASE WASPPhysically, a phoenix resembles an immense bird of prey.
It measures between 10 and 15 feet from beak to tail, but its
wingspan can be as wide as 40 feet. By far its most striking
feature, however, is its plumage. All of its feathers are the
colors of fire—primarily scarlet, crimson, and orange. In
flight or at rest, a phoenix looks like a bird made of flame.
When a phoenix reaches the end of its natural life, or
when it finds itself in an extreme, life-threatening situation,
it immolates itself with intense fire. After its death,
a new phoenix arises from the ashes.
Because of its traditional association with renewal and rebirth,
most cultures ascribe some
symbolic meaning to the
sighting of a phoenix. Some
consider it a positive omen—
a sign of the gods’ favor and a
promise of renewed life and
increased prosperity in
the coming years. Others
(usually those with a
darker outlook on life) see
the firebird as a sign of
approaching death and
destruction—an ordeal
that only the strongest
will survive. Whatever
meaning a particular culture associates with this creature, there’s no doubt that it is
on the side of good. A phoenix doesn’t
involve itself in worldly affairs or join
in mundane conflicts, but neither does
it shy away from attacking evil.
COMBAT
In battle, a phoenix usually begins by shrieking to soften up
its enemies before joining melee with its claws and beak. It
has no fear of fighting to the death, since its immolation
ability ensures its later rebirth.
Shriek (Ex): Once per minute, a phoenix can utter a war
shriek that forces every opponent within 30 feet to succeed
at a Will save (DC 22) or be slowed (as the slow spell) for 1
round. This is a sonic, mind-affecting effect.
Spell-Like Abilities: Always active—detect evil, detect magic,
protection from evil; at will—blindness, blink, blur, color spray, cure
light wounds, dancing lights, find the path, find traps, fire seeds (using
drops of its own blood rather than holly berries as a material
component; no acorn grenades), heal, invisibility, misdirection,
negative energy protection, neutralize poison, polymorph self, produce
flame, remove fear, remove curse, see invisibility; 1/day—incendiary
cloud, reincarnate, pyrotechnics, summon nature’s ally IX, veil, wall
of fire. Caster level 20th; save DC 15 + spell level.
After 10 rounds of ritual and preparation—dismissal, dispel
evil, dispel magic. Caster level 40th; save DC 15 + spell level.
Defensive Aura (Sp): A phoenix has a +5 deflection bonus
to Armor Class. This ability is always in effect.
Immolation (Su): When it knows that death is near, a
phoenix immolates itself as a full-round action. This produces a cloud of flame in a 20-foot-high, 15-foot-radius
spread. Each creature in the area takes 40d6 points of
damage (Reflex DC 22 half ). Half of this damage is fire;
the rest results directly from divine power and is therefore
not subject to reduction by protection from elements (fire), fire
shield (chill shield), or similar
magic. This action kills the
original phoenix and produces a new one, fully
grown and unharmed,
from the ashes. This new
bird arrives at the end of
the round.
Planar Travel (Su): A
phoenix can enter and
exit the Astral Plane or
the Ethereal Plane at will
and navigate through
these planes without error or risk.
Spell-Like Metamagic
(Ex): A phoenix can apply
any one of its metamagic
feats (Empower Spell, Enlarge Spell, Extend Spell,
Heighten Spell, Maximize
Spell) to a spell-like ability
by using that ability as a fullround action.
Telepathy (Su): A phoenix can
communicate telepathically with any
nonavian creature within 60 feet. It can
also speak normally with any avians.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): A phoenix retains its Dexterity
bonus to AC even when flat-footed, and it cannot be
flanked. Even if it fails a Spot check, it still knows that something is in the area; it merely lacks any details as to its exact
location or description.
PLANETOUCHED
“Planetouched” is a term used to describe a creature that can
trace its bloodline back to an outsider. The effects of an outsider’s bloodline can manifest in its descendants for many
generations. Though not as dramatically altered as halffiends or half-celestials, the planetouched still have some
special qualities because of their unusual ancestors.
The planetouched discussed here are exceedingly rare.
Chaonds are humans with slaadi blood, while zenythris are
descended from mysterious beings of law whose identity is
only guessed at.
169
PLANETOUCHED170
There are no “typical” chaonds and zenythris. These creatures neither form their own cultures nor belong to homogenous societies. Instead, they adopt the standards and the
beliefs of the cultures they are born into.
Combat
Chaonds and zenythris fight with
weapons as humanoids do.
Outsider Traits: A planetouched has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised
or resurrected.
CHAOND
Infused with primal forces, chaonds are living embodiments of the
force of chaos in the universe.
Though their slaadi ancestry may be
several generations removed, these
beings still fit only marginally into civilized societies.
A chaond resembles a
human but seems much
cruder, both in form
and in temperament. Its
brutish appearance is
usually marked by wild,
unkempt hair, blocky
facial features, and a
stocky torso and limbs.
Its true nonhuman nature is given away by the slow, shifting colors of its eyes, hair, or skin. The typical chaond has a
gravelly voice that tends to come out like a croak
when the creature is excited.
Most chaonds are chaotically aligned, which
has earned them a reputation as wily and whimsical beings. They often exist on the fringe of a
society because they refuse to succumb to the
rule of law. Chaonds wishing to explore their
primal sides usually take on professions that
involve adventuring in the natural wilderness or harnessing elemental forces.
Chaonds speak Common.
Combat
Considering their heritage, it should be no
surprise that most chaonds fight dirty, with
little regard for rules or fairness. They often
conceal small, poisoned weapons on
their persons. But while chaonds
enjoy a good brawl, there are
few issues that they consider worthy of a fight to
the death.
Shatter (Sp): Once per
day, a chaond can use shatter (caster level 1st or the
chaond’s character level,
whichever is higher; save
DC 11).
PLANETOUCHED
Chaond Zenythri
Medium-Size Outsider Medium-Size Outsider
Hit Dice: 1d8+1 (5 hp) 1d8 (4 hp)
Initiative: +2 +1
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft.
AC: 12 (+2 Dex), touch 12, flat-footed 10 11 (+1 Dex), touch 11, flat-footed 10
Attacks: Sickle +1 melee, or dart +3 ranged Scimitar +3 melee, or light crossbow +2 ranged
Damage: Sickle 1d6, dart 1d4 Scimitar 1d6+1/18–20, light crossbow 1d8/19–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Shatter True strike
Special Qualities: Acid resistance 5, cold resistance 5, outsider Electricity resistance 5, fire resistance 5, outsider
traits, sonic resistance 5 traits, sonic resistance 5
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +2 Fort +2, Ref +3, Will+3
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 9 Str 13, Dex 12, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 9
Skills: Escape Artist +5, Jump +4, Move Silently +4, Balance +6, Intuit Direction +4, Search +4
Tumble +5
Feats: Dodge Weapon Focus (scimitar)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary or twins Solitary
Challenge Rating: 1 1
Treasure: Standard Standard
Alignment: Usually chaotic Usually lawful
Advancement: By character class By character class
MDSkills: A chaond receives a +2 racial bonus on Escape
Artist and Tumble checks.
Chaond Characters
The first class taken by a chaond character becomes that
character’s favored class. Once chosen, it cannot be changed.
A chaond PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 1. Thus, a 1st-level chaond wizard has an ECL
of 2 and is the equivalent of a 2nd-level character.
ZENYTHRI
Zenythris are often viewed as contemplative beings who
strive for personal perfection in every action they take. Many
feel the need to impose their own brand of order on the
world about them. Some even travel to lawless regions for
the express purpose of creating order there. From a zenythri’s
viewpoint, such exercises serve to illuminate the underlying
purpose and structure that lies dormant in all things.
A zenythri appears as a perfect version of a human. Its
skin is flawlessly smooth, and its muscles are well defined
and taut. Even its hair falls effortlessly into place around its
handsomely chiseled face. A zenythri could almost blend
unnoticed among humans were it not for the slightly blue
or purple tint of its skin and hair.
Most zenythris feel compelled to contribute to the societies in which they dwell. As such, they actively work
toward positions of responsibility, which often bring with
them significant social status. Zenythris are natural leaders
and consummate strategists, and they gladly accept leadership roles. These planetouched seem to have no interest in
good or evil so long as they accomplish their goals. Such
a disposition lends itself as readily to tyrannical
methods as benign ones.
Zenythris speak Common. A zenythri that
acquires additional languages speaks them perfectly,
without any sort of accent.
Combat
Zenythris fight instinctively, sizing up opponents for strengths and weaknesses during
melee. They relish in executing difficult
combat moves and work hard to develop
complex fighting styles.
True Strike (Sp): Once per day, a zenythri can
use true strike (caster level 1st or the zenythri’s
character level, whichever is higher).
Skills: A zenythri receives a +2 racial
bonus on Balance and Intuit Direction checks.
Zenythri Characters
A zenythri’s favored class is monk.
A zenythri PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its
class level + 1. Thus, a 1st-level
zenythri monk has an ECL of 2 and is the equivalent of a
2nd-level character.
PSURLON
Psurlons are wormlike creatures with formidable mental
powers. The resemblance between psurlons and worms is
likely more than coincidence; perhaps the monsters were
magically created from earthworms, or an earthworm is a
radically degenerate form of psurlon.
A psurlon has a long, tubular, pinkish body marked with
faint rings, just like an earthworm’s. It also has two arms and
two legs, each of which also looks like a giant earthworm. The
psurlon’s head is little more than a blunt end to its tubular
body. Its only facial feature is a circular maw filled with gnashing teeth that serves as a mouth. It has visual organs (for darkvision) spaced evenly around the head. The typical psurlon
wears a decorative or utilitarian belt fitted with straps and
hooks to carry items, but no other clothing or armor.
Psurlons often choose to live solitary lives, or to live only
with their mates. Sometimes, however, psurlons form small
communities called clusters for the purpose of claiming territory or working toward a common cause.
Psurlons speak Undercommon.
COMBAT
Psurlons never use melee weapons. They can fight with
their bare claws and teeth, but this does not make them
very formidable opponents in physical combat. The real danger a
psurlon presents is in its ability
to cloud, numb, and control the
minds of others.
Blindsight (Ex): A psurlon
can ascertain its surroundings by
sensing sound, scent, heat, and vibration. This ability enables it to discern
objects and creatures within 60 feet. The
psurlon usually does not need to make
Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures
within range of its blindsight.
Immunities (Ex): Psurlons are immune to
sleep, charm, and hold effects.
Telepathy (Su): A psurlon can communicate
telepathically with any creature within 250 feet
that has a language.
AVERAGE PSURLON
Average psurlons perform all day-today tasks related to keeping a cluster running
smoothly. Of all psurlons, it is these that most
often strike out to live
on their own.
171
PSURLON
MD172
An average psurlon stands about 5 feet tall and weighs
about 130 pounds.
Combat
Although they do not relish combat, average psurlons are
naturally suspicious and bad-tempered. They usually
unleash their spell-like abilities against anything that
approaches too closely. They usually begin with mind fog and
then, if menaced by a whole group, follow up with dominate
person to make physically powerful foes turn on their allies.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—detect thoughts, dominate
person, hold monster, mind fog, sleep; 1/day—stoneskin. Caster
level 10th; save DC 13 + spell level.
ELDER PSURLON
Elder psurlons are leaders within their communities. They
are respected for their experience, resourcefulness, and
superior mental abilities.
An elder psurlon stands about 5 feet tall and weighs
about 130 pounds.
Combat
Elder psurlons use much the same tactics as average
psurlons do, but they are more likely to direct the battle
from the rear while their underlings bear the brunt of
the fighting.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—detect thoughts, dominate
person, hold monster, mass suggestion, mind fog, sleep; 1/day—
stoneskin. Caster level 12th; save DC 13 + spell level.
GIANT PSURLON
Giant psurlons are bred for combat. Like all psurlons, however, their mental powers are more formidable than their
physical abilities.
A giant psurlon stands 12 feet tall and weighs about 600
pounds.
PSURLON
Average Psurlon Elder Psurlon Giant Psurlon
Medium-Size Aberration Medium-Size Aberration Large Aberration
Hit Dice: 7d8+7 (38 hp) 12d8+12 (66 hp) 18d8+36 (117 hp)
Initiative: +6 +6 +5
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft.
AC: 12 (+2 Dex), 12 (+2 Dex), 10 (–1 size, +1 Dex),
touch 12, flat-footed 10 touch 12, flat-footed 10 touch 10, flat-footed 9
Attacks: 2 claws +6 melee and bite 2 claws +11 melee and bite 2 claws +16 melee and bite
+4 melee +9 melee +14 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4+1, bite 2d4 Claw 1d4+2, bite 2d4+1 Claw 1d6+4, bite 2d6+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities Spell-like abilities Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., darkvision Blindsight 60 ft., darkvision Blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120
120 ft., DR 15/+1, immunities, 120 ft., DR 15/+1, immunities, ft., DR 15/+1, immunities,
SR 14, telepathy SR 16, telepathy SR 16, telepathy
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +7 Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +13 Fort +10, Ref +9, Will +17
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 14, Con 12, Str 14, Dex 15, Con 12, Str 18, Dex 12, Con 15,
Int 18, Wis 11, Cha 17 Int 20, Wis 17, Cha 17 Int 17, Wis 18, Cha 17
Skills: Balance +12, Concentration +11, Balance +15, Concentration +16, Balance +12, Concentration
Escape Artist +10, Heal +10, Escape Artist +10, Heal +16, +20, Escape Artist +10, Heal
Spellcraft +14 Spellcraft +18 +18, Spellcraft +19
Feats: Combat Casting, Dodge, Combat Casting, Dodge, Combat Casting, Expertise,
Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Expertise, Improved Initiative, Great Fortitude, Improved
Multiattack Iron Will, Mobility, Multiattack Initiative, Iron Will, Lightning
Reflexes, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, team (3–6 Solitary, cluster (1 plus 8–14 Solitary or strike team (1 plus
plus 1 elder psurlon), cluster average psurlons), or strike 1 elder psurlon and 3–6
(8–14 plus 1 elder psurlon), or team (1 plus 1 giant psurlon and average psurlons)
strike team (3–6 plus 1 elder 3–6 average psurlons)
psurlon and 1 giant psurlon)
Challenge Rating: 5 9 15
Treasure: Standard Standard Standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil Usually lawful evil Always neutral evil
Advancement: 8–14 HD (Medium-size) 13–24 HD (Medium-size) 19–36 HD (Large)Combat
Giant psurlons prefer to attack from afar. After softening up
the opposition with mind fog, a giant psurlon follows up with
disintegrate against the most dangerous opponent.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—detect thoughts, dominate person, hold monster, mass suggestion, mind fog, sleep;
1/day—disintegrate, stoneskin. Caster level 18th; save DC 13 +
spell level.
RAGEWIND
Large Undead
Hit Dice: 31d12 (201 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: Fly 120 ft. (perfect)
AC: 22 (–1 size, +5 Dex, +8 deflection), touch 22, flatfooted 17
Attacks: 6 longswords +17/+12/+7 melee
Damage: Longsword 1d8+3/19–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Blade fury, whirlwind
Special Qualities: DR 20/+3, invisibility, see invisibility,
SR 30, superior multiweapon fighting, undead traits,
weapon proficiency
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +15, Will +18
Abilities: Str 17, Dex 20, Con —, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 12
Skills: Balance +7, Hide +16, Intuit Direction +6,
Jump +5, Listen +21, Search +22,
Spot +22, Tumble +20
Feats: Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes,
Dodge, Expertise, Flyby Attack,
Improved Disarm, Mobility, Spring
Attack, Whirlwind Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land
and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair,
or cluster (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None (but see
below)
Alignment: Usually chaotic
evil
Advancement: 32–48 HD
(Large); 49–64 HD (Huge)
Also called sword spirits, ragewinds are the embodied wrath
of dead warriors who perished
in useless battles. They are usually found in the most volatile
and violent of the Outer Planes,
but a few sometimes escape to
wander the Material Plane as
well. On rare occasions, ragewinds
form on the Material Plane at the sites of massive battles
with heavy casualties.
A ragewind normally appears as a churning whirlwind,
within which dozens of suspended weapons dance and clash.
Its true form is a vaguely humanoid, semisolid cloud of white
or gray fog. It has no treasure other than the weapons it carries.
A ragewind can speak Common in a shrill voice that
sounds like the howling of an autumn wind, but it seldom
bothers to do so.
COMBAT
Though longswords are specified in the statistics given
above, a ragewind may incorporate and utilize any sort of
melee weapon, as long as each is at least one size category
smaller than the monster. Some of these weapons may have
magical properties, at the DM’s option. No matter how
many weapons are incorporated into the ragewind’s form, it
can bring no more than six of them to bear at a time.
A ragewind attacks with the weapons that are held aloft
in its swirling winds. Each of these weapons functions
independently, as though wielded by a different individual. The ragewind delights in disarming its opponents
and using their own weapons against them. If overmatched, it uses its invisibility to escape.
Blade Fury (Su): Three times per day, a ragewind can
expand itself outward into a 15-foot-radius spread, filling
that entire space with its whirling weapons. This attack
deals 20d6 points of slashing damage to every
creature within that area (Reflex DC
26 half ). Immediately after this
attack, the ragewind reverts to its
normal size and shape. Once it has
used its blade fury attack, it must
wait 1d4+1 rounds before it can do
so again. A ragewind cannot benefit from both blade fury and
whirlwind at the same time.
Whirlwind (Su): A ragewind can intensify the swirling
air that composes its usual form
to the strength of a whirlwind as
a free action. When it does so,
it transforms into a whirling
mass of air and weapons 5 feet
wide and 20 feet high. Each creature that is at least two size categories smaller than the ragewind and in contact with it
must succeed at a Reflex save (DC
26) or take 3d6 points of damage.
Whether or not this save is successful, an affected creature
must immediately make a second
Reflex save against the same DC. Failure
indicates that the affected creature is picked up by
173
RAGEWIND174
the winds and takes an additional 1d8
points of damage that round and each
round thereafter that it remains suspended in the winds. (The ragewind may
also direct weapon attacks at creatures
caught within its whirlwind if desired,
though it gains no special bonuses for
doing so.) A flying creature may leave the
whirlwind with a successful Reflex save,
though it still takes damage for the
round in which it does so.
A ragewind may also cause its whirlwind to touch the ground, kicking up a
swirling cloud of debris with a 10-foot
radius. This cloud obscures all vision,
including darkvision, beyond 5 feet.
Creatures at a distance of 5 feet have
one-half concealment, and those
farther away have total concealment. A creature caught in this
dust cloud must succeed at a
Concentration check (DC 20) to cast a spell.
Invisibility (Su): At will, a ragewind can suppress its
whirlwind to become invisible. This ability otherwise functions like the invisibility spell (caster level 20th).
See Invisibility (Su): This ability functions like the see invisibility spell (caster level 20th), except that it is always active.
Superior Multiweapon Fighting (Ex): A ragewind fights
with six weapons at once. Because the creature is an amalgam of many dead warriors, a separate intelligence controls
each weapon. Thus, the ragewind has no penalty on attack
rolls for attacking with multiple weapons, and the number
of attacks and the damage bonus for each weapon are calculated as though the weapon were held in a primary hand.
Undead Traits: A ragewind is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a
Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. A ragewind cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is
willing. The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
Weapon Proficiency: A ragewind is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons.
RAGGAMOFFYN
Raggamoffyns are mysterious constructs composed of animated scraps and bits of cloth, metal, or other refuse from
civilized societies—particularly those where magic is
common. Raggamoffyns tend to cluster together, operating
as much in secret as possible, taking control of selected
hosts to further their agendas.
Unlike other constructs, a raggamoffyn is not the result
of any deliberate act of creation. Rather, it is formed when
leftover magical energy interacts
with inanimate objects. The exact
process is not well understood, but
it always results in one of four
types of raggamoffyn.
A raggamoffyn appears as an animated, ragtag assortment of odds
and ends, roughly humanoid in shape.
The four types differ both in the kinds of
refuse that form their bodies and the powers
they possess.
COMBAT
Above all, a raggamoffyn seeks to acquire a host that it can
dominate. The creatures refrain from harming potential hosts
as long as possible, so they work quickly by rushing in with
touch attacks. A foe that is successfully dominated is
wrapped by the raggamoffyn, which then uses its host to
defend itself and other raggamoffyns. Raggamoffyns
unleash their full melee attack capabilities against foes that
are resistant to their mind controlling powers, fearing rightfully that an escaped foe will warn others of the raggamoffyn’s existence.
Control Host (Su): A raggamoffyn can attempt to take
control of any creature it has wrapped (see below). This ability functions like the dominate monster spell (caster level
18th; save DC varies; see individual descriptions). As a free
action, the monster may relinquish control over its host by
physically and mentally disengaging itself from the latter’s
body. Use the captured one template (see the appendix) for a
creature under the control of a raggamoffyn.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a raggamoffyn hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with a slam attack, it deals normal
damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without
provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus varies; see
individual descriptions). If it gets a hold, it can attempt to wrap
(see below) in the next round. Alternatively, the raggamoffyn
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use
its appendage to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the raggamoffyn is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Wrap (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a raggamoffyn
can wrap itself around any foe it has already grabbed with
another successful grapple check. The monster forms a
skintight layer around the wrapped creature, covering it from
head to toe but leaving enough space for the creature to
breathe through its mouth and nose. Attacks on such a target
deal half their damage to the monster and half to the wrapped
creature. An affected creature can extract itself by making a
successful grapple check. Once it has wrapped a creature, the
raggamoffyn can attempt to control it on its next action.
Construct Traits: A raggamoffyn is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires
RAGGAMOFFYNa Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The creature
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. It cannot heal itself but can be healed through
repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A raggamoffyn has
darkvision (60-foot range).
TATTERDEMANIMAL
Tatterdemanimals are the least powerful of the raggamoffyns. They often lurk around rubbish mounds and other
places where refuse is heaped.
A tatterdemanimal appears as a swirling heap of small,
dirty, tattered rags and other scraps of cloth.
Combat
Tatterdemanimals often take animals as hosts because they
are the easier to capture.
Control Host (Su): The tatterdemanimal’s control host
ability has a Will save DC of 12.
Improved Grab (Ex): A tatterdemanimal’s grapple bonus
is +1.
175
RAGGAMOFFYN
Tatterdemanimal Common Raggamoffyn
Small Construct Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 1d10 (5 hp) 3d10 (16 hp)
Initiative: +5 +2
Speed: 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (clumsy) 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (clumsy)
AC: 16 (+1 size, +5 Dex), 17 (+2 Dex, +5 natural),
touch 16, flat-footed 11 touch 12, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Slam +1 melee Slam +4 melee
Damage: Slam 1d4 Slam 1d6+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Control host, improved grab, wrap Control host, improved grab, suffocate, wrap
Special Qualities: Construct traits, immunity to blunt weapons Construct traits
Saves: Fort +0, Ref +5, Will +4 Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +3
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 21, Con —, Int 10, Wis 19, Cha 15 Str 14, Dex 15, Con —, Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 17
Climate/Terrain: Any Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–6) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–4)
Challenge Rating: 1 3
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 2–3 HD (Small) 4 HD (Medium-size); 5–9 HD (Large)
Guttersnipe Shrapnyl
Medium-Size Construct Large Construct
Hit Dice: 8d10 (44 hp) 12d10 (66 hp)
Initiative: +1 +0
Speed: 20 ft., fly 20 ft. (clumsy) 20 ft., fly 10 ft. (clumsy)
AC: 21 (+1 Dex, +10 natural), 24 (–1 size, +15 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 20 touch 9, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Slam +7 melee Slam +12 melee, or gore +12 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+1 Slam 1d8+4, gore 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Control host, glitterdust, improved grab, wrap Cloud of steel, control host, improved grab, wrap
Special Qualities: Construct traits, immunities Construct traits, vulnerability to shatter
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +3, Will +5 Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +8
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 13, Con —, Int 10, Wis 16, Cha 17 Str 18, Dex 11, Con —, Int 10, Wis 19, Cha 17
Climate/Terrain: Any Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–4) Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 5 7
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 9–16 HD (Medium-size); 17–24 HD (Large) 13–18 HD (Large); 19–36 HD (Huge)176
Immunity to Blunt Weapons (Ex): A tatterdemanimal
takes no damage from bludgeoning weapons.
COMMON
Scholars theorize that common raggamoffyns form from
enchanted gloves, robes, hats, and other magic clothing that
was lost or discarded by its owners. They are usually found
near cemeteries and places where magical battles have
recently transpired.
A common raggamoffyn looks like a suit of mismatched
clothing with no wearer. The clothing appears to be in good
repair, and it would probably still be usable if it could be separated from the construct.
Combat
A common raggamoffyn directs its host creature in combat.
It suffocates the host when it has either lost control over the
creature or has no further use for it.
Control Host (Su): The common raggamoffyn’s control
host ability has a Will save DC of 14.
Improved Grab (Ex): A common raggamoffyn’s grapple
bonus is +4.
Suffocate (Ex): A common raggamoffyn can asphyxiate a
wrapped creature by drawing the air from its lungs. This
attack automatically deals 1d4 points of damage per round.
GUTTERSNIPE
Guttersnipes are most prevalent around settlements of
dwarves, gnomes, and halflings. They form from worn-out
and discarded adventuring and construction gear.
A guttersnipe appears as a whirling mound of frayed rope,
worn leather pieces, strings, belts, and swatches of cloth.
Within this mass of material is a core made of small gems,
bits of glass, and glitter.
Combat
Guttersnipes are content to lie in wait for suitable hosts.
They save their glitterdust ability to dazzle foes when they
need to escape.
Control Host (Su): The guttersnipe’s control host ability
has a Will save DC of 17.
Glitterdust (Sp): Once per day, a guttersnipe can use glitterdust (caster level 5th; save DC 15).
Improved Grab (Ex): A guttersnipe’s grapple bonus is +7.
Immunities (Ex): Guttersnipes are immune to spell
effects that produce light or darkness.
SHRAPNYL
Shrapnyls are the only raggamoffyns made entirely of metal.
They lurk near battlegrounds as well as forges.
A shrapnyl consists of bits of metal in every size. Its
appearance can vary greatly—one might consist of swords,
shields, and cooking gear, while another could contain a
helm, coins, chains, and keys.
COMBAT
Shrapnyls are the most aggressive of the raggamoffyns. They
do not hesitate to use their cloud of steel attack when faced
with an overwhelming situation.
Cloud of Steel (Ex): Once per day, a shrapnyl can
explode into a deadly cloud of flying, sharp debris. Every
creature within a 10-foot spread centered on the shrapnyl
takes 4d10 points of damage (Reflex DC 16 half ). This attack
instantly frees a creature wrapped by the shrapnyl from its
control, and the wrapped creature takes no damage from
that cloud of steel attack.
Control Host (Su): A shrapnyl’s control host ability has a
Will save DC of 19.
Improved Grab (Ex): A shrapnyl’s grapple bonus is +17.
Vulnerability to Shatter: The shatter spell deals 3d6 points
of damage to a shrapnyl.
RAGGAMOFFYN
Common Shrapnyl Guttersnipe TatterdemanimalRAMPAGER
Large Beast
Hit Dice: 14d10+70 (147 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 23 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +12 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 21
Attacks: 2 claws +14 melee and bite +9 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+5 plus 1d6 acid, bite 2d6+2 plus
poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Acid, armor damage, fear aura, poison
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60-ft., low-light vision,
scent
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +11, Will +6
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 15, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
Skills: Spot +12
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and
warm deserts, plains, and hills
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 15–25 HD
(Large); 26–35 HD (Huge)
Rampagers (sometimes called
“so-ut,” their goblin name) are
vicious, nocturnal predators
that live only to destroy and
kill. Oddly, their armor, weaponry, and aggressiveness go far
beyond the levels necessary to
bring down food. In fact, rampagers enjoy killing, and they
usually kill far more than they
can eat. In fact, as long as prey
is available, a rampager doesn’t
even stop killing long enough
to feed.
A rampager stands taller
than a man (8 to 10 feet high). Its
body, a solid knot of muscle, is covered with an extremely tough, scaly
hide. The monster has no head as such;
its face juts out from the forward
edge of its body. Two bone-white
eyes peer out from the scaly mass
above the gaping, fang-filled mouth. From behind the face
jut two muscular arms, each of which ends in two long,
hooked claws. The four thick, stumplike legs are similar to
those of an elephant, and a triangular, muscular tail drags
behind the monster. A rampager has very poor hearing,
but its scent ability makes up for that lack.
COMBAT
Something about metal drives a rampager mad. It attacks
creatures wearing metal armor before anyone or anything
else. Once all such targets are dead, it turns its attention to
those wielding metal weapons. After all the metal nearby
is demolished, the rampager starts on the largest structures in the area, ignoring even creatures that are attacking it in favor of demolishing a building (though it does
defend itself once it has lost more than half of its original
hit points). Only after all nearby built-up structures have
been leveled does it finally turn against unarmored heroes
or townspeople.
Acid (Ex): The acid that coats a rampager’s claws not
only deals extra damage on successful attacks, it also dissolves an opponent’s armor and clothing, making those
items useless in 1 round unless the wearer succeeds at a
Reflex save (DC 22). Success indicates that the affected
equipment can be saved by washing it within 1 minute.
Washing requires a full-round action
and at least 1 pint of water.
Armor Damage (Ex): A rampager’s teeth can catch and tear
an opponent’s armor. If the opponent has both armor and a shield,
roll 1d6: A roll of 1–4 affects the
armor and a roll of 5–6 affects
the shield. Make a grapple check
(grapple bonus +19) whenever
the rampager hits with a bite
attack, adding to the opponent’s
roll any bonus for the armor or
shield because of magic. If the
rampager wins, the affected
armor or shield is torn away
and ruined.
Fear Aura (Ex): Each creature that is the target of a rampager’s attack or is within 30 feet
of such a target must succeed at a
Will saving throw (DC 17) or
become shaken. A shaken creature
that is still within 30 feet of the
rampager on its next turn must
make a second Will saving throw
(DC 17) to avoid becoming frightened (same penalties as shaken;
must flee until beyond the 30-foot
radius of the effect).
Poison (Ex): A rampager’s acidic saliva acts as a weak
poison (Fortitude DC 22) with each successful bite attack.
The initial damage is 1 point of Strength damage, and the
secondary damage is 1d4 points of Strength damage.
Scent (Ex): A rampager can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
177
RAMPAGER178
REASON STEALER
Medium-Size Ooze
Hit Dice: 5d10+15 (42 hp)
Initiative: –5
Speed: 10 ft., climb 10 ft.
AC: 5 (–5 Dex), touch 5, flat-footed 5
Attacks: Slam +5 melee, or weapon +5 melee and slam
+0 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+3 (primary), by weapon +3, slam 1d6+1
(secondary)
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Devour mind, improved grab
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., DR 20/+1, grotesque
form, ooze traits
Saves: Fort +2, Ref –4, Will –4
Abilities: Str 14, Dex 1, Con 12, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 6–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–15 HD (Large)
The reason stealer is a relentless, subterranean killer
that murders other creatures to steal their intelligence. Reason stealers live below ground but
make their way to the surface to hunt.
In its normal form, a reason stealer is a
4-foot-diameter puddle of grainy, brownish-yellow slime. If it has recently fed
upon a creature possessing some
form of intelligence, it can roughly
mimic its victim’s shape. Such
an assumed form is misshapen
and blobby, and it only vaguely
resembles the creature that the
reason stealer killed.
A reason stealer doesn’t speak
any language. When
it steals a creature’s
mind, it randomly
mumbles words in that
creature’s language.
COMBAT
A reason stealer lashes out at prey with a sticky pseudopod. Upon delivering the death blow to a foe with its
pseudopod, it steals the opponent’s intellect. Once a
reason stealer gains a modicum of sentience, it becomes a
far deadlier opponent because it can use all the skills,
feats, and spells it has absorbed from its prey. Sentient
reason stealers ceaselessly search for new prey because
they are desperate to avoid returning to their previous
mindless state.
Devour Mind (Su): A reason stealer transfers an opponent’s Intelligence score to itself upon dealing it a killing
blow with a slam attack. This process also heals the monster of 5 points of damage per point of Intelligence gained.
Upon devouring a mind, the reason stealer has access to
any of the dead opponent’s other ability scores, skill ranks,
base attack bonus, and base save bonuses, and it can use
any of these characteristics that are higher than its own. It
also gains the use of the opponent’s feats and any prepared
arcane spells. The reason stealer understands that it must
remove spell components from a victim’s body to cast
spells. All these acquired features last for 24 hours. If a
reason stealer devours the mind of a victim while it still
has the abilities of a previous one, it uses the higher of the
two (the new victim’s or its current value) for ability scores,
base attack bonus, base save bonuses, and skill ranks. It
also gains any feats and spells possessed by the new victim
that it did not already have.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a reason stealer hits an opponent that is its own size or smaller with a slam attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +9, including a +4 racial bonus on grapple
attacks from the sticky substance that covers its pseudopod). If it gets a hold, it has the option to conduct the
grapple normally, or simply use its pseudopod to
hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the reason stealer is not considered
grappled). In either case, each successful
grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals slam
damage.
Blindsight (Ex): A reason
stealer is blind, but its entire
body is a primitive sensory
organ that can ascertain prey
by scent and vibration.
This ability enables it
to discern
objects and
creatures within 60 feet. A
reason stealer usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice
creatures within range of its blindsight.
Grotesque Form (Su): A reason stealer that has devoured
the mind of a creature with an Intelligence score of 1 or
higher can shape its body into a bizarre reflection of that
creature. If the reason stealer has abilities gained from
more than one creature, it assumes a form similar to the
last one it killed. A reason stealer with a humanoid form can
wield weapons, using the fighting skills of any victims it
devoured. It always retains one pseudopod with which to
attack. A reason stealer can maintain a grotesque form as
long as it has an Intelligence score.
REASON
STEALEROoze Traits: A reason stealer is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.
RED SUNDEW
Huge Plant
Hit Dice: 15d8+75 (142 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 11 (–2 size, –1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 4 slams +18 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+9 plus acid
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, sticky acid
Special Qualities: Immunities, plant traits, woodsense
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +4, Will +6
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 8, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm forests
Organization: Solitary or patch (2–5)
Challenge Rating: 13
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 16–28 HD (Huge); 29–45 HD (Gargantuan)
Red sundews are vicious, migratory predators
that roam forested areas hunting for
unwary prey. Unlike many
carnivorous plants, the red
sundew is highly nomadic,
so it rarely remains
in one geographic
area for long.
Though they are
found primarily in
coastal forests and
hot jungles, red sundews can also inhabit cooler woodlands far from these
wet areas.
A red sundew
measures almost
20 feet high and
10 feet across. Its
body looks like a wide mound of tangled,
ropy rags in red, green, and rust colors. These
“rags” are actually ropelike vines coated with a sweetsmelling goo, which gives the plant a slick, wet appearance.
Underneath the mass of vines, a red sundew has a single
stem that measures about 12 feet high and 5 feet across. This
stem is supported by two leglike appendages.
A red sundew begins digesting its prey during combat,
smearing the sticky acid that coats its entire body over its
opponent. Once the opponent dies, the red sundew uses its
tentacles to draw the corpse inside its body mass, where it
continues the digestion process.
COMBAT
Red sundews are aggressive hunters. They attack with
their tentacles, wrapping them firmly around prey to prevent escape while the sticky acid that coats their tentacles
begins the digestion process. Multiple red sundews often
travel together and combine their efforts while hunting.
These carnivorous plants flee when more than half their
number has been slain.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a red sundew hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself
with a slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts
to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +28). If it gets a
hold, it has the option to conduct the grapple normally,
or simply use its tentacle to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the red sundew is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals slam damage.
Sticky Acid (Ex): A red sundew is coated with a thick,
acidic goo. Any creature or object that makes physical
contact with the monster is smeared with this sticky
acid, which deals 1d6 points of acid damage per
round until removed. Thus, any successful hit
from or against the red sundew automatically deals acid damage to the opponent or the opponent’s weapon,
depending upon the point of
contact. Sticky acid remains
on a creature or object for
1d4+1 rounds. It cannot be scraped off, but
it can be washed off
with a full-round action and at least 1
gallon of water.
Immunities
(Ex): Red sundews are immune to fire
and acid.
Plant Traits
(Ex): A red sundew is
immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical
hits or mind-affecting effects. The creature also has lowlight vision.
Woodsense (Ex): A red sundew can automatically sense
the location of anything within 60 feet that is in contact
with vegetation, even objects or creatures that are not in
contact with the same vegetation as itself.
179
RED SUNDEW180
ROGUE EIDOLON
Large Construct
Hit Dice: 9d10 (49 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 30 ft. (can’t run)
AC: 21 (–1 size, +12 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 21
Attacks: 2 slams +10 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+5
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Blood spray, confusion
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 20/+2, SR 19
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +1
Abilities: Str 21, Dex 11, Con —, Int 2, Wis 6, Cha 13
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: 10–18 HD (Large); 19–27 HD (Huge)
Many centuries ago, hidden cults of various dark gods
created large statues in the images of their leaders. The faces of these statues were left blank,
except for the symbols of their deities, to indicate each god’s mastery over its followers.
These statues were placed at honored locations
in temples where they presided over countless
sacrifices.
A dark deity that was especially pleased with a
particular cult cell sometimes sent the tiniest
shred of its power across the dimensions to
infuse that cult’s statue, granting it minimal
sentience. Over the years, these divinely
powered constructs went insane,
becoming rogue eidolons consumed with murderous rage.
Most of them destroyed the cults
over which they presided, down to
the last member, then went on to find
other victims.
A rogue eidolon is typically 12 to 14 feet
tall and usually has a humanoid shape. It is
always constructed of purple stone (often
magically treated to achieve that distinctive color), and its hands are pitch
black. Its face is blank except for a
crude symbol or rune (the symbol of
an evil deity) carved into the otherwise
featureless visage. This symbol leaks a
thick, viscous fluid that looks like
blood and has a sharp, metallic odor.
Drops of this disgusting fluid evaporate within minutes of falling to the
ground, leaving vivid red stains where
they fell. Beyond that, one rogue eidolon differs wildly
from the next in appearance, though most are badly weathered and possess monstrous deformities, such as horns, a
hunched back, tumorous lumps, or misshapen limbs.
COMBAT
A rogue eidolon usually attacks any living creature it
encounters, but the nature of its insanity makes it completely unpredictable. Occasionally a rogue eidolon simply
ignores intruders, perhaps believing them to be loyal cult
members or simply animals unworthy of its attention. At
other times, it may attack and even pursue the same group,
believing its members to be infidels and enemies.
The monster attacks by smashing victims with its stony
fists. Tactics mean little to it, and its attacks are so singleminded that it often ignores easier targets once it has
selected a victim.
Blood Spray (Su): As a free action, a rogue eidolon can
spew a gout of thick blood from the seeping symbol in its
face at a single target within 30 feet. Any creature struck
by this blood must make a Will save (DC 15) or be
afflicted with a terrible madness that causes it to see all its
friends as hated enemies. An affected creature immediately attacks its closest ally, using the best tactics
and items at its disposal. This murderous frenzy
prevents spellcasting but not the activation of
magic items that require spell completion, and it
lasts for 3d6 rounds. Once a rogue eidolon has used
its blood spray, it must wait 1d4 rounds before it can do
so again.
Confusion (Sp): Any creature struck by a
rogue eidolon must make a Will save (DC 15) or
become confused. This condition is permanent;
only a greater restoration, limited wish, miracle, or
wish spell can restore the subject to
normal. The effect is otherwise
identical with that of a confusion
spell (caster level 10th).
Construct Traits: A rogue eidolon is immune to mind-affecting effects,
poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and
any effect that requires a Fortitude
save unless it also works on objects.
The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain,
or death from massive damage. It
cannot heal itself but can be healed
through repair. It cannot be raised or
resurrected. A rogue eidolon has darkvision (60-foot range).
ROGUE
EIDOLONRUKARAZYLL
Large Outsider (Earth, Evil)
Hit Dice: 12d8+48 (102 hp)
Initiative: +8
Speed: 70 ft., climb 50 ft.
AC: 23 (–1 size, +8 Dex, +3 natural, +3 profane), touch 20,
flat-footed 12
Attacks: 3 tendrils +19 melee and bite +4 melee, or spit
ooze +19 ranged
Damage: Tendril 1d6–2, bite 1d6–2 plus 2d4 acid
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fungus, spell-like abilities, spit ooze
Special Qualities: DR 20/+2, evasion, outsider traits,
profane alacrity, SR 23
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +16, Will +11
Abilities: Str 6, Dex 27, Con 19, Int 18, Wis 17, Cha 18
Skills: Balance +22, Bluff +19, Climb +6, Concentration
+14, Diplomacy +8, Disguise +19, Escape Artist +16,
Forgery +9, Hide +14, Intimidate +19, Jump +0,
Knowledge (religion) +12, Search +9, Sense Motive +18,
Spellcraft +12, Spot +8, Tumble +23
Feats: Expertise, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip,
Weapon Finesse (tendril)
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or cell (3–12)
Challenge Rating: 14
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 13–24 HD (Large); 25–36 HD
(Huge)
Rukarazylls are consummate deceivers and
tricksters. When summoned to the Material
Plane (usually from the Elemental Plane
of Earth), they delight in
masquerading as charismatic
men or women. In such guises,
they often attempt to convince
locals to establish cults dedicated
to apparently benign (but
altogether fabricated)
minor deities. Over
time, the rukarazyll
slowly perverts the followers of such cults to
the worship of an evil deity.
When it doesn’t have the time
or resources to seed cults, a
rukarazyll contents itself
with selling cursed
items that it
passes off as
beneficial, or posing
as a priest and inflicting
diseases on those seeking healing, or pursuing other
underhanded and cruel tricks.
In its true form, a rukarazyll is a loathsome creature. Its
body is a bulbous mass of seething fungoid matter, studded with eyes and gasping orifices that leak stinking,
black drool. It has six long, hook-studded tendrils that
extrude from various random points on its body. Three of
these tendrils serve as legs; the other three serve as hands.
Extending from the top of the body is a long scaly tentacle, atop which sits a head that resembles a ram’s skull,
complete with horns. Great fangs stud the rukarazyll’s lipless mouth, from which bubbling acidic froth constantly
dribbles. Writhing nests of pale fungal filaments fill its
eye sockets, and more of these filaments grow out of other
random spots all over its body. The monster’s natural voice
is thick and gurgling, as if its throat were partially clogged
with mud, but it can disguise its voice as well as its body
when it adopts another form.
COMBAT
The rukarazyll is physically weak, but it makes up for its
lack of strength with speed and accuracy granted by the
unholy energy it channels. It enjoys melee combat so
much that it often forgoes its spell-like abilities if a chance
to fight presents itself.
Combat with a rukarazyll is both disorienting and terrifying. As a full attack action, the monster can strike with three
of its tendrils and bite with its acidic jaws. It takes full
advantage of its feats, using Expertise to best
effect and Improved Trip and Improved
Disarm as opportunities arise. It also relies
on its Tumble skill to avoid drawing
attacks of opportunity as it weaves about.
Fungus (Su): Any living creature struck
by a rukarazyll’s melee attack must make a
Fortitude saving throw (DC
20) or become infested
with the fecund fungus that grows on the
monster’s body. Infestation requires 1 round for a
Small or smaller creature or
1d4 rounds for a Mediumsize creature. Each size category larger than Mediumsize adds an extra 1d4 rounds
to the infestation
time. An affected
creature can free
itself of the fungus
before infestation is
complete with either a
remove disease spell or
by taking 10 points of fire
or cold damage.
181
RUKARAZYLL
DR182
Once infestation is complete, the fibrous white filaments begin to seethe and twist in the host’s body, actively
trying to resist any actions the host attempts. Because of
this, the host incurs a –2 penalty on all attack rolls, Dexterity-based skill checks, and Reflex saving throws. In
addition, the fungus continues to grow in the host’s body
(albeit at a much slower rate), dealing 1 point of Charisma
drain per day. A host whose Charisma reaches 0 becomes
unconscious, and within 1 hour his or her body transforms into an immobile heap of fungus that lives for 3d6
weeks before perishing. Any creature that comes into contact with one of these transformed bodies must make a
successful Fortitude saving throw (DC 20) or become
infested, with the same onset time and effects as infestation from the rukarazyll itself. A remove disease spell given
after infestation is complete destroys the fungus but does
not restore lost Charisma.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—alter self, blur, cat’s grace,
darkness, desecrate, detect good, detect magic, entangle, mirror
image, plant growth, protection from good, snare, telekinesis, teleport without error (self plus 50 pounds of objects only), undetectable alignment; 3/day—polymorph self, unhallow, unholy
blight; 1/day—command plants, contagion, heal, wall of thorns.
Caster level 12th; save DC 14 + spell level.
Spit Ooze (Su): Once every 10 minutes, a rukarazyll
can expel a Medium-size gray ooze (see the Monster
Manual) from its mouth as a grenadelike weapon
with a 10-foot range increment. If it hits a target,
the gray ooze can immediately attempt to use
its improved grab ability and constrict if it gets
a hold. If the attack misses, determine miss
distance and direction normally. The ooze then
moves to attack in the next round. Gray oozes
created in this manner live only 2d4 rounds, dissolving into pools of gray goo when that duration expires.
Evasion (Ex): If exposed to any effect that
normally allows a Reflex save for half damage, a
rukarazyll takes no damage on a successful save.
Outsider Traits: A rukarazyll has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Profane Alacrity (Su): A rukarazyll is infused with
an unholy energy that grants it improved reflexes and
speed. This energy gives the monster a +3 profane
bonus to AC and allows it to take 10 on Balance,
Escape Artist, and Tumble checks in any circumstance. Once per hour, a rukarazyll can call upon its
profane alacrity ability to gain a temporary boost to its
movement, doubling both its speed and the profane
bonus to its AC for 1 minute. Afterward, the rukarazyll’s profane energy is depleted for 1 hour. During
this period, it has no profane bonus to AC and cannot take 10 on Balance, Escape Artist, or Tumble
checks except in circumstances that would ordinarily allow it.
RUNIC GUARDIAN
Large Construct
Hit Dice: 17d10 (93 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 28 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +18 natural), touch 10, flatfooted 27
Attacks: Slam +18/+13/+8 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+10 plus stunning strike
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Runic spells, stunning strike
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 30/+3, fast
healing 10, find master, guard, shield master, teleport
without error
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +5
Abilities: Str 24, Dex 13, Con —, Int —, Wis 11, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 18–25 HD (Large); 26–51 HD (Huge)
Runic guardians are constructs similar to shield guardians
(see the Monster Manual), but with far superior physical
and magical capabilities. Runic guardians are especially popular among dwarves and giants, though
spellcasters of all races find them useful.
A runic guardian is a massive, human-shaped
figure made of stone, steel, and lead. Its hands and
arms are constructed of hollow stone and filled with
lead for a more deadly punch. Carved, magic runes
inlaid with precious metals adorn its head, limbs and
torso. Whenever a runic guardian casts a spell, these
runes flare up into a variety of brilliant colors.
A runic guardian serves one master that is designated at the time of its creation, and no other. The
construct is keyed to a specific, unique piece of jewelry (normally a ring or amulet) worn by its master
and made at the time of its creation. The master can
use this piece of jewelry to call the runic guardian to
his or her side from any distance, or even from
another plane. A runic guardian knows whether
or not the bearer of its jewelry is really its
master, and it slays any pretenders outright.
COMBAT
In battle, a runic guardian protects its master by
casting predetermined defensive spells upon him
or her, then pounding away at foes with its leaden fists.
Runic guardians equipped with offensive spells use them
only when directly commanded to do so. A runic
guardian is instantly aware of its master’s death, whether
or not it was present at the time. When the master’s death
RUNIC
GUARDIANoccurs, the construct immediately goes on a rampage,
attacking all creatures within sight. Possession of its jewelry in such a circumstance gains the bearer neither control over the construct nor safety from its attacks. The
runic guardian does not stop until destroyed.
Runic Spells (Sp): A runic guardian can hold up to six
spells. These spells must be cast into its body when it is created. One spell can be placed on the runic guardian’s head,
one on each limb, and one on its torso. The table below
gives the maximum level of spell that each of its body parts
can hold. Alternatively, the entire guardian can accommodate a single inscribed spell of 6th or 7th level, but this
covers its whole body.
Body Part Highest Spell Level
Head 1st
Each arm 2nd
Each leg 3rd
Torso 5th
Each of these spells
is usable once per
day as a spell-like
ability. The runic
guardian discharges
a spell either when
directly commanded to do so
or when a predetermined situation arises.
Stunning Strike (Ex): Any
creature hit by a runic guardian’s slam attack must make a successful Fortitude saving throw
(DC 25) or be stunned (unable to
act, loses any Dexterity bonus to AC,
and an attacker gets a +2 bonus on
attack rolls against it) for 1 round, in addition to taking the normal damage from the blow.
Constructs, oozes, plants, undead, incorporeal creatures, and creatures immune to critical hits cannot
be stunned.
Construct Traits: A runic guardian is immune to
mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromantic effects, and
any effect that requires a Fortitude save unless it also
works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical
hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability drain,
energy drain, or death from massive damage. It cannot
heal itself but can be healed through repair. It cannot be
raised or resurrected. A runic guardian has darkvision
(60-foot range).
Fast Healing (Ex): A runic guardian regains lost hit
points at the rate of 10 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the runic guardian to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Find Master (Su): No matter the distance, a runic
guardian can find the piece of jewelry that connects it
with its master, and it teleports to that spot when called.
(Should the master call the construct and then remove
the jewelry, the runic guardian finds only the jewelry
upon its arrival.) This ability functions even across planar
boundaries.
Guard (Ex): The runic guardian blocks blows, granting
its master a +4 deflection bonus to AC. This power functions
only when the runic guardian is within 5 feet of its master.
Shield Master (Sp): A runic guardian’s master, when in
possession of the keyed piece of jewelry, can activate this
defensive ability when within 150 feet of the construct.
Shield master transfers three-fourths of the damage that
would otherwise be dealt to the master to the runic
guardian instead. This ability otherwise functions like the
shield other spell (caster level 25th), except that it
provides no AC or saving throw bonuses.
Teleport without Error (Sp): Once per
day, a runic guardian
can use teleport without error (caster level
18th). It normally uses
this ability to answer a call
from its master, teleporting
unerringly to his or her side.
CONSTRUCTION
The process for creating a runic
guardian is nearly identical with
that for creating a shield guardian.
A runic guardian costs 200,000 gp to
create. This price includes the construct’s physical body, the keyed piece of
jewelry, and all the materials and spell components that are consumed or become a permanent part of the guardian.
Creating the body requires a successful Profession (engineer) or Craft (sculpting) check (DC 20).
The creation of the keyed jewelry item requires a successful Craft (metalworking) check (DC 15). This
jewelry is always made of the same metals and other
materials as the guardian’s runes.
After the body and jewelry are constructed, the
creature must be animated through magical rites that
require one month to complete. The creator must be at
least 16th level and have the Craft Wondrous Item feat.
The creator must cast any spells he or she wishes to
place on the runic guardian personally at this time,
though they may come from an outside source such as
a scroll. The creator must labor for at least 8 hours per
day in a specially prepared workroom or laboratory that
costs 2,000 gp to establish.
183
RUNIC
GUARDIAN184
SHADOW SPIDER
Huge Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 13d10+65 (136 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft., climb 30 ft.
AC: 13 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 4 claws +19 melee and bite +17 melee
Damage: 4 claws 2d4+8, bite 2d6+4 plus paralysis
Space/Reach: 15 ft. by 15 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, paralysis, silk slick
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 15/+1, low-light
vision, shadow walk, SR 23
Saves: Fort +13, Ref +11, Will +5
Abilities: Str 26, Dex 13, Con 20, Int 5, Wis 13, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +21, Hide –2*, Listen +5, Spot +6
Feats: Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 14–26 HD (Huge); 27–39 HD
(Gargantuan)
Shadow spiders are carnivorous ambush predators from the
Plane of Shadow that prefer to hunt on the Material Plane.
They possess frightening intelligence and cunning.
A shadow spider is a huge, shadowy arachnid. It has a
5-foot-diameter body and stands roughly 2 1/2 feet tall.
Its eight eyes are such a deep red color that they appear black.
A shadow spider maintains a larder (actually a
pocket in the Plane of Shadow) stacked with the
desiccated corpses of its prey. The monster never
carries treasure; it simply leaves its victims’ possessions on the corpses. When its larder becomes
overfilled, the shadow spider abandons it and
finds a new one to fill with food.
Shadow spiders speak Common.
COMBAT
A shadow spider prepares elaborate traps
for its victims in dungeons and caverns.
It uses its silk slick ability to make a slope
or stair slippery, then waits in the shadows at the bottom. When a creature falls,
the shadow spider steps out of the shadows and attempts to grab its prey with its
four foreclaws. If successful, the monster
uses shadow walk to carry the victim to its
larder in the Plane of Shadow. Once there,
the shadow spider paralyzes and abandons
that creature, then returns to its trap for
more prey. Only when there are no more
creatures, or it is in danger of dying, does a shadow spider
return to its larder and begin eating. Shadow spiders never
clean up their traps, so adventurers occasionally get forewarning of one from the dropped items (belongings of past
victims) that litter the area.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a shadow spider hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself
with two claw attacks, it deals normal damage and attempts
to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +29). If it gets a hold,
it has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use two claws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the shadow spider is not considered grappled).
In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals damage for
two claw attacks.
Paralysis (Ex): A shadow spider’s teeth are coated
with a paralyzing fluid. Any creature hit by its bite must
make a successful Fortitude save (DC 21) or be paralyzed
for 4 rounds.
Silk Slick (Su): As a full-round action, a shadow spider
can spray a layer of spider silk over any solid surface. It can
cover up to 100 square feet with this substance, which dries
and evaporates in 13 rounds. The slick silk functions in all
other respects like a grease spell (caster level 13th; Reflex
save DC 21).
Shadow Walk (Sp): At will, a shadow spider can use shadow
walk (caster level 10th; Will save DC 16).
Skills: *A shadow spider gets a +20 circumstance bonus
on Hide checks when in shadows.
SHADOW
SPIDERSIRINE
Medium-Size Fey (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 4d6 (14 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 30 ft., swim 60 ft.
AC: 17 (+4 Dex, +3 deflection), touch 17, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Short sword +2 melee, or touch +2
melee touch
Damage: Short sword 1d6/19–20,
touch 1d4 Int
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Charming song,
Intelligence damage, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: Deflection,
low-light vision, soothing
touch
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +8, Will +7
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 18, Con 11,
Int 13, Wis 16, Cha 17
Skills: Animal Empathy +10,
Concentration +7, Heal +10,
Hide +11, Perform (dancing,
singing, plus one other)
+14, Swim +15, Wilderness
Lore +10
Feats: Dodge, Expertise
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm
aquatic
Organization: Solitary or family (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size)
Sirines are playful, gregarious creatures that love to sing,
swim, dance, and laugh. They frequently draw strangers into
their games and parties, but they rarely grant such visitors
more than a few hours of their time.
A sirine appears to be a normal human woman in most
respects, although its skin often has a noticeable yellow or
green tinge. The hair can be any normal, human hair color,
or it can be lustrous silver or dark green. A sirine wears only
lightweight clothing while on land and often nothing at all
while in the water. The typical sirine carries a short sword or
dagger at all times.
Although sirines are always happy to have fun with
strangers, they are extremely reclusive about their communities. They take care to seek camaraderie only when away
from their homes, and then only for a short while. Any creature that follows a sirine home, or stumbles upon that location accidentally, is likely to come under attack.
After a few hours, most sirines have had enough of the
companionship of other creatures, so they slip away, usually
by diving underwater. For a stranger, and particularly a
male, earning the trust of a sirine is nearly impossible.
These creatures trust no one except other sirines, though
in time of need they do accept any offered aid. Such assistance does not earn the giver any more of a sirine’s company than would otherwise have been bestowed, however, nor does the creature feel obligated to reward its
benefactor in any way. Occasionally a sirine bestows
a gift, usually a small gem, seashell, or other trinket, on an admirer who has been particularly
charming company.
COMBAT
Sirines are not especially tough in a standup fight, but they excel at evading and
escaping from enemies. They rarely let
themselves get drawn into battle unless
their homes are threatened. Instead,
they use their spell-like abilities and
special attacks to slip away, or use a combination of singing and Intelligence
drain to incapacitate foes and then
dump them far away where they can
cause no harm.
Approxmiately one-third
of all sirines are proficient
with bows, javelins, or slings.
About one in ten sirines has
a magic weapon, usually a javelin of lightning.
Charming Song (Sp): At will, a sirine can sing a special
song that functions like a charm person spell (caster level
2nd; save DC 14), except that it lasts for 11 hours and affects
every creature that hears it.
Intelligence Damage (Su): Any creature hit by a sirine’s
touch attack takes 1d4 points of Intelligence damage (or
2d4 points on a critical hit).
Spell-Like Abilities: 1/day—fog cloud, improved invisibility, polymorph self. Caster level 11th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Deflection (Su): A sirine is surrounded by an aura that
grants it a deflection bonus to AC equal to its Charisma bonus.
Soothing Touch (Su): A sirine, if it desires, can use its
touch to restore 1d6 points of Intelligence damage caused
by any sirine.
Skills: A sirine receives a +8 racial bonus on Perform
checks.
185
SIRINE
DC186
SPAWN OF KYUSS
Medium-Size Undead
Hit Dice: 4d12+3 (29 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 11 (–1 Dex, +2 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 11
Attacks: Slam +6 melee, or touch +6 melee touch, or
Kyuss’s gift +1 ranged touch
Damage: Slam 1d6+6 and Kyuss’s gift
Special Attacks: Create spawn, fear aura, Kyuss’s gift
Special Qualities: Curative transformation, fast healing 5,
turn resistance +2, undead traits
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +0, Will +4
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 9, Con —, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 15
Skills: Hide +5, Jump +10, Move Silently +5, Spot +6
Feats: Toughness
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, shamble (3–4), or
horde (3–4 plus 1–6 Huge or larger zombies)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size);
9–12 HD (Large)
Spawn of Kyuss are disgusting undead
creatures created by Kyuss, a powerful
evil cleric turned demigod. Completely mad, the spawn of Kyuss
wander caverns, crypts, and sometimes the open countryside searching for victims.
A spawn of Kyuss looks like a
well-rotted zombie. Only once
the monster is within 20 feet
do the writhing, green worms
crawling in and out of its skull orifices become apparent. A spawn of
Kyuss is usually clad in rotted clothing, though a rare few wear
decaying pieces of armor.
A cleric of 16th level or higher
may use a create greater undead
spell to create new spawn of Kyuss.
This process requires maggots from the
corpse of a diseased creature in addition to the normal
material components.
Spawn of Kyuss split into multiple smaller groups when
creating their own spawn, and it is rare to encounter more
than three of them together. Occasionally a larger creature
falls under the curse of a spawn of Kyuss and follows it as a
normal zombie (see below).
COMBAT
Unlike zombies, spawn of Kyuss are not limited to partial
actions, and they are intelligent enough to pretend that they
have restricted movement until ready to attack. They normally use their fear auras to scatter victims, then gang up on
individuals until they have caught all opponents.
Create Spawn (Su): Once per round as a free action, a
spawn of Kyuss can transfer a worm from its own body to
that of an opponent. It can do this whenever it hits with a
slam attack, but it can also make the transfer by means of a
successful melee touch attack or a ranged touch attack, hurling a worm at a foe from a distance of up to 10 feet.
Each worm is a Fine vermin with AC 10 and 1 hit point.
It can be killed with normal damage or by the touch of
silver. On the spawn’s next action, the worm burrows into
its host’s flesh. (A creature with a natural armor bonus of +5
or higher is immune to this burrowing effect.) The worm
makes its way toward the host’s brain, dealing 1 point of
damage per round for 1d4+1 rounds. At the end of that
period, it reaches the brain. While the worm is inside a
victim, a remove curse or remove disease effect destroys it,
and a dispel evil or neutralize poison effect delays its
progress for 10d6 minutes. A successful Heal check (DC
20) extracts the worm and kills it.
Once the worm reaches the brain, it deals 1d2 points
of Intelligence damage per round until it either is
killed (by remove curse or remove
disease) or slays its host
(death occurs at 0 Intelligence). A Small, Mediumsize, or Large creature slain
by a worm rises as a new spawn
of Kyuss 1d6+4 rounds later;
a Tiny or smaller creature
quickly putrefies; and a
Huge or larger creature becomes a normal zombie of the
appropriate size. Newly created
spawn are not under the control
of their parent, but they usually
follow whatever spawn of
Kyuss created them.
Fear Aura (Su): A spawn of Kyuss continuously radiates a fear effect. This ability functions like a fear spell (caster level 7th; Will
save DC 14), except that it affects all creatures within a
40-foot radius. Any creature that makes a successful saving
throw against the effect cannot be affected again by the fear
aura of that spawn of Kyuss for 24 hours.
Kyuss’s Gift (Su): Any creature hit by a spawn of
Kyuss’s slam attack must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
12) or contract this supernatural disease. The incubation
period is 1 day, and the disease deals 1d6 points of Constitution damage and 1d4 points of Wisdom damage (see
Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
SPAWN
OF KYUSS
BSThese effects manifest as rotting flesh and dementia. An
affected creature gets only half the benefits of natural
and magical healing, though a cure disease effect removes
the affliction.
Curative Transformation (Ex): Any remove curse or
remove disease effect, or a more powerful version of either
of these effects, transforms a spawn of Kyuss into a normal zombie.
Fast Healing (Ex): A spawn of Kyuss regains lost hit
points at the rate of 5 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the spawn of Kyuss
to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Turn Resistance (Ex): A spawn
of Kyuss is treated as an undead
with 6 Hit Dice for the purpose of turn, rebuke, command, and bolster attempts.
Undead Traits: A spawn of Kyuss
is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis,
stunning, disease, death effects,
necromantic effects, and any effect
that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects. It
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from
massive damage. A spawn of Kyuss
cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature
has darkvision (60-foot range).
SPELL WEAVER
Medium-Size Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 10d8–10 (36 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 18 (+3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 13,
flat-footed 15
Attacks: 2 slams +9
Damage: Slam 1d3–1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities, spells
Special Qualities: Chromatic disk, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to mind effects,
shielded mind, spell weaving, SR 21, telepathy
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +10, Will +10
Abilities: Str 9, Dex 16, Con 9, Int 18, Wis 17, Cha 16
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) +13, Scry +14, Spellcraft +17,
Spot +12, Use Magic Device +15
Feats: Empower Spell, Enlarge Spell, Extend Spell,
Heighten Spell, Spell Focus (Abjuration), Spell Focus
(Evocation), Spell Penetration
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary or raid (3–6)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: Double items (magic items only)
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–30 HD (Medium-size)
These creatures are enigmatic in the extreme. Outside of
the fact that they covet magic items, little is known about
them. Most encounters with spell weavers
occur when they attempt to purloin magic
items from other creatures.
A spell weaver is a scrawny, hairless, six-armed creaure about 5 feet
tall. It is humanoid in shape, with a
vaguely birdlike face and large, dark
eyes. A long neck allows it to twist
and turn its face in any direction.
Usually only one spell weaver is
encountered at a time, but occasionally these monsters organize themselves into a raiding party to seize a
particular item. Such a raid is
extremely well planned and is usually
the result of months of investigation conducted through a combination of scrying and simple
spying—an activity made easier by
the spell weaver’s invisibility power.
Spell weavers do not communicate
with anyone except their own kind.
This means, of course, that no one has
ever had a meaningful conversation
with a spell weaver, so nothing is
known about the background, motivations, or society of these creatures other
than what their actions reveal. Occasionally, for reasons that no one else understands, a spell weaver leaves a written
note where a humanoid can find it.
Such messages are invariably rambling and often completely incoherent,
so they usually raise more questions
than they answer.
Spell weavers do not speak, but they can
communicate with one another telepathically across a distance of 1,000 miles.
COMBAT
A spell weaver is pathetically weak in melee but powerful in
magic. Its ability to cast multiple spells simultaneously
makes it a dangerous opponent indeed. A spell weaver usually remains invisible until it is ready to attack, then uses
plane shift to escape, hopefully in possession of the magic
item for which it came.
187
SPELL
WEAVER188
Spell-Like Abilities: Always active—see invisiblity; at
will—detect magic, invisibility; 1/day—plane shift. Caster
level equals spell weaver’s effective sorcerer level; save DC
13 + spell level.
Spells: A spell weaver casts spells as a sorcerer two levels
higher than its Hit Dice. (That is, a spell weaver with 10 Hit
Dice casts spells as a 12th-level sorcerer; spells known
9/5/5/4/3/2/1; spells/day 6/7/7/7/6/5/3; save DC 13 +
spell level, or 15 + spell level for Abjuration and Evocation
spells.) A spell weaver prefers combinations of spells that
focus on attacks, defense, and transportation.
Chromatic Disk: A spell weaver is never without its
chromatic disk. This 6-inch-diameter indestructible disk
glows with colors that slowly shift through the spectrum.
This object stores ten additional spell levels of energy
that the creature can tap and use as it wishes—the spell
weaver could, for example, cast two extra 5th-level spells
in a day, or three 3rd-level spells and one 1st-level spell,
or any other combination of extra spell levels that adds
up to ten, so long as no single spell is higher than 5th
level. (For this purpose, two 0-level spells are equivalent
to one 1st-level spell.) To tap this spell energy, a spell
weaver must hold the chromatic disk in at least one of its
hands. The disk automatically recharges itself to full
power every night, at midnight. A spell powered by the
disk is cast as though the caster had the Spell Focus feat
for the spell in question.
Only a spell weaver can utilize a chromatic disk. Should
any other creature pick one up and try to tap its energy (by
employing the Use Magic Device skill, for instance), it
explodes, dealing 4d10 points of damage to everything
within a 30-foot radius.
Immunity to Mind-Affecting Effects: Because its alien mind functions differently than those of other
creatures, a spell weaver is immune to all mind-affecting spells
and effects.
Shielded Mind (Ex): Attempts by creatures of other
races to communicate telepathically with a spell weaver, or to read its mind, always
fail. A creature making such an
attempt must succeed at a Will
save (DC 17) or be affected as
if by a confusion spell (caster
level equals spell weaver’s
effective sorcerer level) for
1d6 days. This effect can be
dispelled or removed with a
heal effect.
Spell Weaving (Ex): These
monsters are infamous for their
ability to cast more than one spell at a
time. Casting a spell occupies a number of the spell weaver’s
arms equal to the spell’s level (maximum 6th). A spell
weaver can cast more than one spell simultaneously, as
long as the sum of the spell levels is six or less. It could, for
example, cast one 6th-level spell, one 4th-level and one 2ndlevel spell, one 3rd-level and three 1st-level spells, six 1stlevel spells, or any combination of spells whose levels add
up to six or less. (A single 0-level spell occupies one arm.)
Telepathy (Su): Spell weavers can communicate with
each other telepathically at a range of up to 1,000 miles.
SPELLGAUNT
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 16d10+48 (136 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Bite +24 melee and 2 claws +17 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+8, claw 1d6+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Disjunctive bite, enhanced bite, force
web, snatch item
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 40/+4, detect
magic, low-light vision, quick leap, SR 35
Saves: Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +5
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 14, Con 16, Int 13, Wis 11, Cha 21
Skills: Balance +10, Climb +11, Hide +14, Jump +19,
Spot +21
Feats: Expertise, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip,
Multiattack, Weapon Focus (bite)
Climate/Terrain: Any forest, mountains
or underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or nest
(10–40)
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 17–30 HD (Large);
31–45 HD (Huge)
Spellgaunts feast upon the arcane
energy stored within magic items and
creatures that use spells, draining the
magic from them in the process.
A spellgaunt appears as a bizarre,
elongated arachnid. Its spindly legs
are 10 feet long, and its flat, golden
body is covered with hairy, chitinous plates. The monster has tremendous, saw-edged fangs that
end in fine, razor-sharp points.
Sparkling saliva drips continuously
from its maw.
SPELLGAUNTCOMBAT
A spellgaunt senses magic items and attacks any creature
that carries one. It usually tries to immobilize foes with its
force web first, then moves in to feed, drinking up the
strongest magic first. Foes that evade its webs are bitten and
clawed. If outnumbered, a spellgaunt moves quickly to
snatch any visibly displayed magic items, then flees to its
lair to feed in peace.
Disjunctive Bite (Su): A magic item bitten by a spellgaunt (see Attacking an Object in Chapter 8 of the Player’s
Handbook) must make a successful Will save (DC 23) or
instantly become a nonmagical object. A spellgaunt feeding
on an artifact has a 33% chance of destroying the item. If it
destroys the item, it must make a successful Fortitude save
(DC 25) or die instantly from an overwhelming ingestion of
magical energy.
A spellcaster or a creature with supernatural or spell-like
abilities that is bitten by a spellgaunt must make a Fortitude
save (DC 23) or lose the ability to cast spells or use its magical abilities for 1d2 rounds.
Enhanced Bite (Ex): A spellgaunt’s fangs function as
+4 weapons.
Force Web (Su): A spellgaunt can spray flexible strands
of sticky, invisible force at a single Medium-size or smaller
target up to 20 feet away. A successful Reflex save (DC 23)
lets the target avoid the webs; failure means the creature is
stuck and entangled (–2 penalty on attack rolls and –4
penalty to Dexterity). A force web is immune to damage of
all kinds from most spells, including dispel magic. However,
disintegrate immediately destroys a force web, and it is also
vulnerable to the effects of a sphere of annihilation or a rod of
cancellation. Since force webs extend into the Ethereal
Plane, they also affect ethereal creatures. A force web dissolves after 1d4 hours.
Snatch Item (Ex): A spellgaunt can take an openly displayed magic item away from an opponent with a successful
disarm attempt, whether or not the item is actually a
weapon. It cannot remove armor or other items that are
attached at multiple locations, but it can snatch forcefully
enough to break a single strap or other such attachment—
the strap holding a wand to an opponent’s belt, for example.
Detect Magic (Su): A spellgaunt can see magical auras
in its line of sight to a range of 120 feet. It immediately
senses the aura strength of each magic item and magical
effect it detects.
Quick Leap (Ex): A spellgaunt can make a standing jump
as a free action.
Skills: A spellgaunt receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks, a +6 racial bonus on Jump checks, and a +12 racial
bonus on Spot checks.
SPIRIT OF THE LAND
Huge Fey (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 20d6+200 (270 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +7 deflection), touch 16, flat-footed 15
Attacks: None
Damage: None
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: All-around vision, elemental manifestation, fast healing 10, incorporeal subtype, low-light
vision, natural invisibility, telepathy, SR 34
Saves: Fort +16, Ref +13, Will +16
Abilities: Str —, Dex 13, Con 30, Int 20, Wis 19, Cha 25
Skills: Animal Empathy +14, Concentration +23, Diplomacy
+9, Knowledge (nature) +16, Listen +15, Search +9, Sense
Motive +18, Spellcraft +18, Spot +17, Wilderness Lore +18
Feats: Cleave*, Dodge, Expertise, Great Cleave*, Improved
Bull Rush*, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip*, Mobility,
Power Attack*, Sunder*
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 23
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 21–30 HD (Huge); 31–60 HD (Gargantuan)
A spirit of the land is a powerful force of nature that lies dormant until the area it guards is threatened. Each inhabits a
particular geographical area, existing as a living part of the
land. A spirit of the land usually assumes dominion over a
small valley, a river, a desert, or some other bounded geographical feature. These creatures dwell in all regions of the
world, and more than one can exist within the same area,
each concerned with a particular aspect of the terrain.
In its natural form, a spirit of the land is an invisible and
intangible force. It appears as a shapeless mist to creatures
that can see invisible things. When it wishes to manifest a
physical form, a spirit of the land can assume the shape of a
humanoid, animal, or elemental of its own size composed of
one particular element—air, earth, fire, or water.
Spirits of the land are always aware of what transpires in
their territories, and they punish all who would ravage or
defile them. They get along well with druids as well as with
races that respect the land.
Spirits of the land speak Common, Elven, Dwarven, and
most goblinoid languages. They can also communicate telepathically with speakers of other languages.
COMBAT
In combat, a spirit of the land prefers to strike invisibly,
using its command over weather, nature, and the elements
to destroy its enemies. Opponents may find themselves
189
SPIRIT OF
THE LAND190
confronted by an earthquake, followed by a rain of lightning
bolts accompanied by hurricane-force winds. A spirit attacks
relentlessly, coordinating its actions to keep foes off balance
while remaining unseen. To fight in melee, a spirit of the land
must manifest an elemental form. In this shape, it usually
focuses on destroying one foe before moving on to the next.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—chain lightning, chill metal,
cone of cold, control water, control weather, control winds, create
water, earthquake, fire storm, fog cloud, heat metal, ice storm,
incendiary cloud, lightning bolt, move earth, produce flame,
quench, sleet storm, solid fog, soften earth and stone, spike
stones, stone shape, wall of fire, wall of ice, wall of stone,
whirlwind, wind wall. Caster level 20th; save DC 17 +
spell level.
All-Around Vision (Ex): A spirit of
the land is a part of all the terrain that
surrounds it, so it sees from all directions at once. Because of this ability, it
gains a +4 racial bonus on Search and Spot
checks, and it cannot be flanked, regardless
of its form.
Elemental Manifestation (Su):
Once per day, a spirit of the land can
assume a form composed of elemental
material (air, earth, fire, or water), so long as
that element exists in some form on its terrain. In elemental form, a spirit of the
land is no longer invisible or incorporeal.
It gains the element-specific qualities
noted in the appropriate manifestation section below and loses the benefits of
the incorporeal subtype. Should a
spirit of the land’s elemental
manifestation be destroyed, the
monster dissipates but is
not slain. A dissipated
spirit of the land must wait 24
hours before it can use any of its abilities again.
While a spirit of the land is manifested, the following
changes to its statistics are in effect: AC 19, touch 9, flat-footed
18; Atk +14 melee (2d8+6, 2 slams); SQ DR 30/+3; Str 23.
Incorporeal Subtype: In its incorporeal form, a spirit of
the land can be harmed only by other incorporeal creatures,
+1 or better magic weapons, spells, spell-like abilities, and
supernatural abilities. The creature has a 50% chance to
ignore any damage from a corporeal source, except for force
effects or attacks made with ghost touch weapons. An incorporeal spirit of the land can pass through solid objects, but
not force effects, at will. Its attacks ignore natural armor,
armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and force effects
work normally against them. An incorporeal spirit of the
land always moves silently and cannot be heard with Listen
checks if it doesn’t wish to be.
Natural Invisibility (Su): An incorporeal spirit of the
land remains invisible even when it attacks. This ability is
always active, but the monster can suppress or resume it as a
free action.
Telepathy (Su): A spirit of the land can communicate
telepathically with any creature within 5 miles that has a
language.
Feats: *A spirit of the land has access to the feats marked
with an asterisk only while it is manifested.
AIR MANIFESTATION
To manifest as air, a spirit of the land must have a
windy valley, breezy seashore, or the like in its terrain. In this form, it gains the following abilities.
Air Mastery (Ex): Any airborne creature takes a –1
penalty on attack and damage rolls made against a
spirit of the land manifested as air.
Flight (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested
as air is naturally buoyant. At will as a free
action, it can produce an effect like that of
the fly spell (caster level 5th), except that the
effect applies only to itself. This ability gives
it a fly speed of 120 feet (perfect).
EARTH MANIFESTATION
An earth manifestation simply requires any
type of land. In this form, a spirit of the land
gains the following ability.
Earth Mastery (Ex): A spirit of the land
manifested as earth gains a +1 bonus on
attack and damage rolls if its foe is touching
the ground.
FIRE MANIFESTATION
A fire manifestation requires a volcanic region,
hot spring, or the like
on the spirit of the
land’s terrain. In this form, it gains
the following abilities.
Burn (Ex): Any creature that is hit by the slam attack of a
spirit of the land manifested as fire, or that hits the monster
with a natural weapon or an unarmed attack, must succeed
at a Reflex save (DC 30) or catch on fire. The fire burns for
1d4 rounds.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested as fire
is immune to fire damage but takes double damage from
cold unless a saving throw for half damage is allowed. In
that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and
double damage on a failure.
WATER MANIFESTATION
To manifest as water, a spirit of the land must have a river,
lake, pond, or other waterway in its terrain. In this form, it
gains the following abilities.
Swim (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested as water can
swim at a speed of 60 feet.
SPIRIT OF
THE LAND
MDWater Mastery (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested as
water gains a +1 bonus on its attack and damage rolls if its
opponent is touching water.
STONE SPIKE
Medium-Size Elemental (Earth)
Hit Dice: 3d8+12 (25 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 2 slams +6 melee
Damage: Slam 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: Elemental traits
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +1, Will +1
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 8, Con 19, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11
Skills: Listen +6, Spot +4
Feats: Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Large)
The stone spike is a cousin of the earth elemental. Dwarf
spellcasters often summon and bind stone spikes to serve as
guards and to assist
with tunnel construction. They are slow but untiring fighters and workers.
A stone spike resembles a roughly sculpted column of
stone with four or more crystal-tipped arms. Sharp, stony
protrusions cover its body.
Stone spikes seem to like dwarves, and they usually serve
such masters without complaint. Sages speculate that the
monsters think of dwarves as kindred spirits—hard-working,
rugged, and indomitable.
Stone spikes speak Terran and Dwarven.
COMBAT
Stone spikes lack the coordination to employ more than two
of their arms at once. These creatures prefer to plod resolutely
forward in combat, battering any foe that comes within reach.
Elemental Traits (Ex): A stone spike is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected.
The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
SWAMPLIGHT LYNX
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+30 (85 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 15 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 2 claws +14 melee and bite +9 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+5, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, pounce, rake 1d3+2,
spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision,
marsh move
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +5
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +5*, Jump +6, Listen +7, Move Silently +9,
Spot +8
Feats: Dodge, Improved Initiative, Run
Climate/Terrain: Any marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, or pride (5–10)
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–30 HD (Huge)
Swamplight lynxes are sleek, nocturnal hunters that prowl
marshes and wet lowlands. They are fond of humanoid
prey, and they especially enjoy the taste of elven flesh.
A swamplight lynx is a sturdy animal, 9 to 10 feet long,
with a sleek, lithe, feline body. It has large paws, a small
head, and a short tail. Its coat can be any shade from dark
yellow to olive, and this coloration allows it to blend in
easily with its swampy surroundings.
191
STONE SPIKE192
A swamplight
lynx cannot speak,
but it can be trained
to understand any
one language.
COMBAT
Swamplight lynxes
are cunning foes,
whether stalking
their prey over long
distances or waiting
patiently in ambush.
They often use their
light ability to surprise, distract and
confuse their prey
before pouncing
with bared claws.
Swamplight lynxes
are solitary animals,
but they do engage in
cooperative hunting.
Pounce (Ex): If a swamplight lynx charges, it can make a
full attack (including a rake attempt; see below) even
though it has moved.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a swamplight lynx hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself
with a bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to
start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack
of opportunity (grapple bonus +19). If it gets a hold, it
can also rake on the same round. Thereafter, it has the
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use
its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the swamplight lynx is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically
deals bite damage.
Rake (Ex): On any round
that a swamplight lynx has
a hold on an opponent (see
Improved Grab, above), it can make
two rake attacks (+14 melee) with its hind
legs for 1d3+2 points of damage each. The
swamplight lynx can also attempt to rake
when it pounces on an opponent.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—blur, daze, faerie fire,
light. Caster level 6th; save DC 12 + spell level.
Marsh Move (Ex): Swamplight lynxes take no movement penalties for moving in marshes or mud.
Skills: *A swamplight lynx receives a +4 bonus on Hide
checks when in marshlands.
SYLPH
Small Outsider (Air)
Hit Dice: 3d8–3 (10 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft., fly 90 ft. (good)
AC: 12 (+1 size, +1 Dex), touch 12, flat-footed 11
Attacks: Unarmed strike +3 melee
Damage: Unarmed strike 1d2–1 subdual
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spells
Special Qualities: Improved invisibility, outsider traits,
spells, SR 14, summon elemental
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +6
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 8, Int 15, Wis 16, Cha 17
Skills: Animal Empathy +9, Concentration +5, Escape
Artist +7, Hide +11, Move Silently +7
Feats: Empower Spell
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm mountains
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard (gems and magic items only)
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Small)
Sylphs are native to the Elemental Plane of Air, but
they have a liking for the scenery of the Material
Plane. They often maintain homes high in the
mountains, but since they love to travel, they
are rarely found near their homes.
A sylph appears as a small, beautiful woman
with translucent, brightly colored wings. The
typical sylph prefers filmy clothing and brightly
colored jewelry.
Sylphs always become invisible at the approach of
strangers and remain so until they know whether
there is any danger. The mere presence of danger,
however, doesn’t necessarily cause them to flee; they
are so naturally curious that they may linger in dangerous situations just to watch. They are generally
friendly, especially to human males.
Sylphs speak Auran and Common.
COMBAT
Sylphs seldom engage in physical combat and
usually do not carry any weapons. They depend
on their spells and special abilities to protect
themselves. When threatened, they often
summon elementals to defend them.
Spells: A sylph can cast arcane spells
as a sorcerer. Caster level = sylph’s Hit
Dice + 4; spells known 7/5/3/2;
spells/day 6/7/7/5; save DC 13 +
spell level.
SYLPHImproved Invisibility (Sp): At will, a sylph can use improved
invisibility (self only).
Outsider Traits: A sylph has darkvision (60-foot range).
It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Summon Elemental (Sp): Once per day, a sylph can use
summon monster VI (caster level 12th) to summon a Large air,
earth, fire, or water elemental.
TEMPEST
Gargantuan Elemental (Air, Earth, Fire, Water)
Hit Dice: 24d8+216 (324 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (good)
AC: 24 (–4 size, –2 Dex, +10 natural, +10 deflection), touch
14, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Slam +23/+18/+13/+8 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+13
Space/Reach: 40 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Burn, drench, spell-like abilities, whirlwind
Special Qualities: Defensive aura, DR 15/+2, elemental
mastery, elemental traits, fire subtype
Saves: Fort +23, Ref +12, Will +8
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 6, Con 28, Int 8, Wis 11, Cha 17
Skills: Concentration +18, Listen +11, Spot +12
Feats: Cleave, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: 25–48 HD (Gargantuan); 49–72 HD (Colossal)
Though it resembles a massive storm, a tempest is actually
an intelligent, living creature related to both elementals and
genies. All four elements coexist within its form: air in the
wind, earth in the whirling sand and dirt, fire in the heat of
the lightning, and water in the rain.
Tempests are uncommunicative for the most part. Very rarely,
one of them may know a few dozen words in Common. Other
than that, they speak only the languages of the elementals.
COMBAT
A tempest is seldom in a good mood, so most encounters
with these creatures end in a battle.
Burn (Ex): Anyone hit by a tempest’s slam attack must
succeed at a Reflex save (DC 31) or catch fire. The flame
burns for 1d4 rounds. A burning creature can take a moveequivalent action to put out the fire. Any creature hitting a
tempest with a natural weapon or unarmed attack takes fire
damage as though hit by its slam attack and also catches fire
unless it succeeds at a Reflex save.
Drench (Ex): The tempest’s touch puts out torches,
campfires, exposed lanterns, and other open flames of
nonmagical origin if these are of Huge size or smaller. The
creature can dispel magical fire it touches as if by dispel magic
(caster level equal to tempest’s HD).
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—chill touch, gust of wind, lightning bolt, wind wall. Caster level 9th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Whirlwind (Su): A tempest can transform itself into a
whirlwind (or vortex if underwater) once every 10 minutes
and remain in that form for up to 1 round for every 2 HD it
has. The whirlwind is 5 feet wide at the base, up to 30 feet
wide at the top, and between 10 and 50 feet tall (tempest’s
choice). In this form, it can move through the air (or water,
as a vortex) or along a surface at its fly speed.
Any creature one or more size categories smaller than
the tempest that comes into contact with the whirlwind
must make a successful Reflex save (DC 31) or take 4d6
points of damage. It must also succeed at a second Reflex
save (DC 31) or be picked up bodily and held suspended
in the powerful winds, automatically taking 4d6 points of
damage per round. A creature that can fly is allowed a
Reflex save at the same DC each round to escape the
whirlwind. The creature still takes damage but can leave if
the save is successful. The tempest can eject any carried
creatures whenever it wishes, depositing them wherever
it happens to be.
If the whirlwind’s base touches the ground, it creates a
swirling cloud of debris. This cloud is centered on the
193
TEMPEST194
tempest and has a diameter equal to half the whirlwind’s
height. The cloud obscures all vision, including darkvision,
beyond 5 feet. Creatures 5 feet away have one-half concealment, while those farther away have total concealment.
Anyone caught in the cloud must succeed at a Concentration check (DC 31) to cast a spell.
Defensive Aura (Sp): A tempest has a +10 deflection bonus
to Armor Class. This ability is always in effect.
Elemental Mastery (Ex): A tempest gains a +1 bonus on
attack and damage rolls if both it and its foe are in contact
with any of the four elements (air, earth, fire, or water).
Elemental Traits (Ex): A tempest is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits or
flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature
also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Fire Subtype (Ex): A tempest is immune to fire damage
but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for
half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half
damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
TERATOMORPH
Gargantuan Ooze
Hit Dice: 28d10+170 (324 hp)
Initiative: –3
Speed: 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (poor), swim 90 ft.
AC: 3 (–4 size, –3 Dex), touch 3, flat-footed 3
Attacks: Slam +28 melee
Damage: Slam 4d6+16 plus entropic touch
Space/Reach: 30 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Entropic touch, portalwake, warp reality
Special Qualities: Blindsight 240 ft., detect law, dimensional instability, immunities, ooze traits, SR 32
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +6, Will +4
Abilities: Str 32, Dex 5, Con 20, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 29–36 HD (Gargantuan);
37–84 HD (Colossal)
Teratomorphs lurk in the watery
depths of the sea and in underground caverns. Normally,
they spend most of their
time floating on underwater currents, but sometimes these currents
wash them ashore.
Occasionally they
come ashore of their own
volition to search for food.
A teratomorph is a shapeless horror the size of a cottage. Its
body consists primarily of thick, translucent, iridescent slime
coating coils of opaque tissue that shift and move, as though
constantly in a state of flux. Beneath its slimy hide, bursts of
energy occasionally flash, lighting portions of its form
momentarily. Sections of the ooze periodically emit beams of
light or crackling energy, while other sections fade into
smoke or vanish altogether.
A teratomorph gains nutrients by infesting living creatures
with the force of chaos. The very act of transforming another
creature with its entropic touch sustains and nurtures the
ooze’s growth. But a creature does not have to come in contact
with a teratomorph to experience its entropic effects. In fact,
the monster’s very presence can unravel reality and tear holes
in the fabric between planes. Unlucky creatures that pass too
close to a teratomorph sometimes find themselves transported to other planes with no means of returning.
Powerful spellcasters have long sought ways to harness
the powers of the teratomorph. Unfortunately, portions of
the ooze that are separated from the main body do not last
long, dissolving into nothingness after only a few hours. The
otherworldly matter that makes up the body of a teratomorph remains unstable until enough of it is concentrated
in one place that its mass defeats the internal forces working
to tear it apart. This effect probably explains why teratomorphs smaller than Gargantuan are never encountered.
When such a creature reaches 84 Hit Dice, it immediately
splits into smaller oozes, each with 28 Hit Dice.
COMBAT
The teratomorph is a mindless creature. When it isn’t eating,
it is on the move looking for something to eat. It surges
forth to attack any Small or larger creature that passes
within range of its blindsight, but it ignores creatures smaller than this.
A teratomorph attacks by extruding a
massive wave of chaotic protoplasm to smash
its prey. Not only does
this attack deal extensive
bludgeoning damage, it
also infuses the creature
touched with raw chaos.
Entropic Touch (Su):
The entropic energy that
surges through a teratomorph’s shapeless body
causes horrible transformations in living creatures that
come into contact with it. If a
creature struck by a teratomorph’s slam attack fails a Fortitude saving throw (DC 29),
its body transforms in
some way, causing one
of the following effects:
TERATOMORPH1d20 Result
1–7 Physical Mutation. The touch of the teratomorph transforms the opponent’s anatomy, resulting in 1d6 points of
Strength drain or Dexterity drain (50% chance for each).
8–13 Tissue Annihilation. The touch of the ooze causes tiny
portions of the opponent’s anatomy to vanish, resulting in
2d4 points of Constitution drain.
14–18 Transformation. The opponent undergoes a transformation
as though affected by a polymorph any object spell (caster
level 20th). This painful process deals 5d20 points of subdual damage. The DM can randomly determine the
subject’s new form or choose a particular form.
19 Bonding. The ooze sticks to the target and automatically
succeeds at a grapple check. Each round thereafter, the
teratomorph can attempt a new grapple check (grapple
bonus +44) to deal 4d6+16 points of bludgeoning damage.
The opponent must succeed at a new Fortitude saving
throw (DC 29) each round that the teratomorph deals
damage to avoid further effects from the entropic touch. (If
this result comes up more than once, roll again.)
20 Absorption. The opponent is entirely absorbed by the ooze.
An absorbed creature dies instantly and leaves behind no
trace of a body, so only a miracle, true resurrection, or wish
spell can restore it to life. Absorbing a creature grants the
ooze a new permanent Hit Die.
Portalwake (Su): The presence of a teratomorph places
tremendous strain on the borders between the planes, causing tears and rips to appear nearby. Each round, one creature
within a 120-foot radius of the teratomorph, chosen at
random, must make a Reflex saving throw (DC 19) or be
moved to a random plane as though by a plane shift spell.
Warp Reality (Su): The potent chaotic energy that surges
through and out of a teratomorph’s body can have amazing
effects on the surrounding terrain. When the monster is at
rest, this energy is calm, but when the monster moves or
attacks, the energy lashes out in a 120-foot emanation.
These ripples of chaos cause the surrounding terrain to
warp and writhe, imposing a –4 circumstance penalty on
attack rolls and Dexterity checks for all creatures in the area
except the teratomorph.
Every round that this reality warp persists, there is a 10%
chance that the chaotic energy manifests in a more dramatic manner. Such chaos manifestations duplicate spell
effects. Roll 1d20 and refer to the appropriate line on the
following table to determine the spells effects produced.
All these effects function as the spells of the same names
(caster level 20th; save DC 10 + spell level), except that they
affect all the appropriate targets (except the teratomorph)
within the warp reality area and last for 1 round.
Roll Result
1–4 Entangle and obscuring mist
5–8 Color spray and glitterdust
9–12 Stinking cloud and spike growth
13–14 Spike stones and cloudkill
15–16 Insect plague and mind fog
17–18 Acid fog and transmute rock to mud
19 Fire storm and reverse gravity
20 Earthquake and prismatic spray (roll once for all
affected creatures)
Blindsight (Ex): A teratomorph is blind, but its entire
body is a primitive sensory organ that can ascertain prey by
scent and vibration. This ability enables it to discern objects
and creatures within 240 feet. A teratomorph usually does
not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures
within range of its blindsight.
Detect Law (Su): A teratomorph has a continual detect
law ability (as the spell) with a range of 20 feet.
Dimensional Instability (Su): Each time an opponent
strikes a teratomorph with a weapon, there is a chance that
the portion of the creature’s body struck simply doesn’t
exist at that instant. Any melee or ranged attack directed at
the teratomorph has a 20% miss chance that cannot be
avoided with spells such as true seeing or true strike. Dimensional anchor negates this ability, reducing the miss chance
to 0% for the duration of the effect.
Immunities (Ex): A teratomorph is immune to lightning, acid, and all spells with the chaotic descriptor.
Ooze Traits: A teratomorph is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing.
It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.
THRI-KREEN
Medium-Size Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 2d8 (9 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 4 claws +3 melee and bite –2 melee, or gythka +4
melee and bite –2 melee, or chatkcha +4 ranged
Damage: Claw 1d4+1, bite 1d4 plus poison, gythka 2d6+1,
chatkcha 1d6+1
Special Attacks: Poison, psionics*
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to sleep, leap
Saves: Fort +0, Ref +5, Will +4
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 15, Con 11, Int 8, Wis 12, Cha 7
Skills: Balance +4, Climb +3, Hide +4*, Jump +35, Listen
+6, Spot +4
Feats: Deflect Arrows (B), Weapon Focus (gythka)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm desert
Organization: Solitary or pack (5–10)
Challenge Rating: 1
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: By character class
Thri-kreen, often called mantis warriors, are intelligent
humanoids with insectlike features. They prefer deserts
and savannas, where they maintain a nomadic lifestyle
as hunters.
A thri-kreen looks like a bipedal praying mantis. Of the
six limbs protruding from its midsection, two are used for
walking, and each of the other four ends in a four-fingered
195
THRI-KREEN196
hand. A sandy yellow exoskeleton covers an adult thri-kreen’s
body. Two compound eyes, two antennae, and a complicated
jaw structure that includes a pair of wicked mandibles give
its head an insectlike appearance. The typical thri-kreen
wears a harness, belt, and slings for holding its equipment,
but no clothing or armor.
Thri-kreen are at home in arid, open landscapes where
they can easily blend in with the windblown dunes and
bare rock. Permanent thri-kreen communities are almost
nonexistent; instead, packs of thri-kreen range widely
over their own territories, foraging and hunting for daily
sustenance. On rare occasions, two or more packs
may come together to join their strength against
especially dangerous intruders.
Thri-kreen speak a language made up of clicks
and snaps of their mandibles. Most thri-kreen
whose packs roam near humanoid civilizations
also speak Common.
COMBAT
While hunting, thri-kreen use their natural
camouflage to sneak up on potential prey. Thrikreen can close to combat (and flee from it) more
quickly than most of their foes because of
their speed and their ability to leap. They
can use the gythka and chatkcha
(exotic weapons that are unique to
mantis warriors), but they prefer
to attack with their claws and their
poisoned bites.
Poison (Ex): A thri-kreen delivers its
poison (Fortitude save DC 11) with a successful bite attack. The initial and
secondary damage is the same
(paralysis for 2d6 minutes). A thrikreen produces enough poison for
one bite per day.
Psionics (Sp): *When using
the Psionics Handbook, apply
the following psionic abilities to a thri-kreen. At will—
chameleon, know direction; 1/day—
displacement, lesser metaphysical weapon. Manifester level
10th; save DC 8 + power level.
Attack/Defense Modes: ego whip, mind thrust/thought shield,
empty mind. A thri-kreen manifests powers, and gains
additional attack and defense modes, as if it were a psychic
warrior or a psion with Psychometabolism as its primary
discipline. (A psionic thri-kreen character’s favored class
is psychic warrior, though a few choose monk or psion
with the primary discipline of Psychometabolism.)
Immunity to Sleep (Ex): Since thri-kreen do not sleep,
they are immune to magic sleep effects. A thri-kreen spellcaster
still requires 8 hours of rest before preparing spells.
Leap (Ex): A thri-kreen is a natural jumper. It gains a +30
competence bonus on all Jump checks, and its maximum
jumping distance is not limited by height.
Skills: *The exoskeleton of a thri-kreen blends in well
with desert terrain, granting it a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks in sandy or arid settings.
THRI-KREEN CHARACTERS
A thri-kreen character’s preferred class is ranger, but a
few prefer the path of the cleric or druid. A thri-kreen
character begins play with Hit Dice 2d8, which gives it a
+2 base attack bonus; base saves Fort +0, Ref +3, Will +3;
Deflect Arrows, Exotic Weapon Proficiency [gythka], and
Exotic Weapon Proficiency [chatkcha] as bonus feats; one
additional feat of choice; and skill points equal to twice
its Intelligence score. Its class skills as a thri-kreen are
Balance, Climb, Hide, Jump, Listen, and Spot. Many
thri-kreen also qualify for the monstrous feats Multiattack, Multidexterity, and Multiweapon Fighting
and choose these in preference over other feats.
A nonpsionic thri-kreen PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 3. Thus, a 1st-level nonpsionic thri-kreen ranger has an ECL of 4 and is the
equivalent of a 4th-level character.
A psionic thri-kreen PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level +5. Thus, a 1st-level psionic
thri-kreen ranger has an ECL of 6 and is the
equivalent of a 6th-level character.
THRI-KREEN EQUIPMENT
Thri-kreen warriors have invented two exotic
weapons that are unique to their race—the gythka
and the chatkcha. These are described below.
Gythka: This Large exotic melee double
weapon is a polearm with a blade at each end.
The wielder can fight with it as if fighting with
two weapons, but doing so incurs all the
normal attack penalties associated with
fighting with two weapons, as if the
wielder had a one-handed weapon and
a light weapon (see Attacking with
Two Weapons in Chapter 8 of the
Player’s Handbook). A thri-kreen who has the Multiweapon Fighting feat can wield two gythkas at once as
double weapons because of its four arms.
Each end of a gythka deals 2d6 points of damage. Each
end is a slashing weapon that deals double damage on a critical hit and threatens a critical hit on an attack roll of 20.
Cost: 60 gp; Weight: 25 lb.
Chatkcha: This Medium-size exotic ranged weapon is a
crystalline throwing wedge. Its sheer weight makes it
unwieldy in the hands of those not proficient with it.
A chatkcha deals 1d6 points of piercing damage and has a
range increment of 20 feet. It deals double damage on a critical hit and threatens a critical hit on an attack roll of 20.
Cost: 1 gp; Weight: 3 lb.
THRI-KREENTWIG BLIGHT
Small Plant
Hit Dice: 1d8+1 (5 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 15 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 2 claws +0 melee
Damage: Claw 1d3–1 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison
Special Qualities: Partial immunity to piercing weapons,
plant traits
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +1, Will +0
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 5, Wis 11, Cha 4
Skills: Hide +10, Listen +4, Move Silently +5, Spot +4
Feats: Skill Focus (Hide)
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 1/3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 2–3 HD (Small)
Twig blights are treelike creatures of evil
disposition. They
can root themselves in normal soil and
draw nutrients
like normal
plants, and
they look
much like
w o o d y
s h r u b s
in this mode.
But these
m o n s t e r s
have a special taste for
blood, and
they greatly
prefer that to
making food
through photosynthesis. Indeed, a twig blight
that lives underground must subsist on blood, since it gets
no sunlight.
A twig blight normally stands about 3 1/2 feet tall. Its leafless branches interlock to create a humanoid shape.
Sages believe that the first twig blights grew from seeds
of the Gulthias Tree, which sprouted from a wooden stake
used to slay an ancient vampire. Instead of producing fruit,
twig blights reproduce through their root systems, like
aspen trees.
Twig blights speak Sylvan.
COMBAT
Twig blights usually huddle together in a group, trying to
blend in with an area’s natural vegetation (or with piles of
debris or firewood) until suitable prey comes along. They
particularly enjoy lurking near campsites or waterholes,
where they can often catch prey unawares.
Poison (Ex): A twig blight delivers its poison (Fortitude
save DC 11) with each successful claw attack. The initial
damage is 1 point of Strength damage; there is no secondary damage.
Plant Traits (Ex): A twig blight is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or mind-affecting effects. The creature
also has low-light vision.
Skills and Feats: A twig blight gains skills and feats as a fey.
VAPORIGHU
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil)
Hit Dice: 10d8+30 (75 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 20 (–1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 20
Attacks: 2 slams +12 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+2/19–20 plus corrosive slime
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Corrosive slime, fear aura, poison breath,
spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: DR 20/silver, outsider traits, SR 17,
summon night hag, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +6
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 9, Con 16, Int 13, Wis 8, Cha 10
Skills: Balance +12, Concentration +16, Intimidate +13,
Knowledge (the planes) +14, Listen +12, Spellcraft +13,
Spot +12
Feats: Improved Bull Rush, Improved Critical (slam),
Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 11–18 HD (Medium-size); 19–30 HD (Large)
Vaporighus are native to the plane of Gehenna. In all respects
they are petty, sadistic, and voracious. The only force that
motivates them is the gnawing pain of hunger that they can
never satiate.
A vaporighu is a hideous, bloated, waddling blob of hairy
flesh, vaguely humanoid in shape. Its skin is the color of
197
TWIG BLIGHT198
gangrenous rot and
drips with poisonous slime.
Long, tangled, and matted fur hangs in shaggy layers from
its forearms, back, belly, and stumplike legs, and its head is
topped with a pair of small horns. Where its mottled skin
is visible, veins of pulsing bile can be seen just beneath the
surface. Its breath comes and goes in enormous, wheezing
gurgles, punctuated by an occasional explosion of mucus.
A vaporighu reeks of all the decay and sulphurous stench
of Gehenna.
Vaporighus seem to perform no specific function in
Gehenna other than to waylay whatever is unfortunate
enough to cross their paths. They often pick out likely
hiding places near portals or the rare watering holes in
Gehenna and wait for victims to approach.
Vaporighus speak Abyssal and Infernal, but they usually
do not communicate.
COMBAT
Vaporighus are tenacious opponents. They fight without
subtlety or art, and they fight to the death.
Corrosive Slime (Ex): Vaporighus constantly exude a
mucuslike slime that contains a corrosive substance. A vaporighu’s slam attack leaves behind a smear of slime. An opponent’s armor and clothing dissolve and become useless in 1
round unless the wearer succeeds at a Reflex save (DC 18).
Any weapon that strikes a vaporighu dissolves in 1 round
unless the wielder succeeds at a Reflex save (DC 18). Even on
a failed save, armor, clothing, or weapons can be saved by
washing, which requires a full-round action and at least 1 pint
of water or weak acid (such as wine) per item.
Fear Aura (Su): Anyone (except other vaporighus) who
sees a vaporighu within 30 feet must make a Will saving
throw (DC 15) or become frightened for 2d4 rounds. An
opponent who succeeds at the saving throw is immune to
that vaporighu’s fear aura for 24 hours. This is a mind-affecting fear effect.
Poison Breath (Ex): Once every 1d4 rounds, a vaporighu
can exhale poison breath as a standard action. This creates a
15-foot cone of toxic and corrosive green vapor. Every creature in the area takes 1d10 points of acid damage (no saving
throw). The vapor is poisonous (Fortitude save DC 18). The
primary damage is paralysis (3d6 rounds); the secondary
damage is 3d6 Con. The vapor lingers for 2d6 rounds, dealing acid damage and requiring a new saving throw each
round a creature remains within it or touches it. Vaporighus
are immune to their own poison breath and to that of others
of their kind.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—animate objects, enlarge, fly,
light, mislead, produce flame, sleep. Caster level 10th; save DC
10 + spell level.
Outsider Traits: A vaporighu has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Summon Night Hag (Sp): Once per day, a
vaporighu can summon one night hag. This
ability functions like a summon monster VII
spell (caster level 10th).
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Because of its unusual talent for
detecting prey, a vaporighu retains its Dexterity bonus to AC
(if any) even when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked.
WINDGHOST
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 18d8+72 (153 hp)
Initiative: +10
Speed: Fly 30 ft. (good)
AC: 21 (–2 size, +6 Dex, +7 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Bite +21 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Darkvision 60 ft., improved grab, spelllike abilities, swallow whole, windsong
Special Qualities: Fast healing 3, flight, immunities, SR
25, true seeing
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +14, Will +13
Abilities: Str 28, Dex 23, Con 18, Int 15, Wis 14, Cha 19
Skills: Hide +12, Knowledge (arcana) +15, Listen +17,
Spot +18
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative,
Lightning Reflexes, Weapon Focus (bite)
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate or warm
Organization: Solirary, pair, brood (3–5), or swarm (6–10)
Challenge Rating: 15
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually lawful
Advancement: 19–32 HD (Huge); 33–54 HD (Gargantuan)
WINDGHOSTMysterious observers that float casually through the skies,
windghosts are unfathomable creatures that inspire curiousity, puzzlement, and sometimes fear.
The body of a windghost is conical. From top to base, it
measures 24 feet. At its base is a gaping, circular mouth, 8
feet across and lined with rows of teeth. Its body tapers up
to a rounded cap. A windghost’s rough and mottled hide is
purplish gray in color, and it has milk-white eyes. The
windghost has two 20-foot tentacles dangling from either
side of its base. These appendages primarily serve to carry
items. A windghost’s body and eyes sparkle with ripples of
blue and violet light. This light is strong enough to illuminate the creature’s form but makes it apppear ghostly, hence
its name.
Windghosts may appear frightening, but they are not
aggressive creatures. Nonetheless, their unexpected arrivals
and strange appearance often lead to unprovoked attacks
from frightened ground-dwellers.
Windghosts speak Auran.
COMBAT
Windghosts never attack without provocation. When
threatened, they surround themselves with magical protections before swooping down to physically attack. If facing
overpowering opponents, windghosts flee, flying straight
up until they are out of sight.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a windghost hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +30). If it gets a hold, it can
try to swallow in the next round. Alternatively, the windghost has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or
simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the windghost is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it
makes during successive rounds automatically
deals bite damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—antimagic
field, dispel magic, spell turning. Caster
level 16th; save DC 14 + spell level.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A windghost can swallow a single creature
that is at least two size categories
smaller than itself by making a successful
grapple check (grapple bonus +30), provided it already has
that opponent in its mouth (see Improved Grab, above).
Once inside the windghost, the opponent takes 1d8+4
points of bludgeoning damage and 1d6+2 points of acid
damage per round from the monster’s stomach. A successful
grapple check allows the swallowed
creature to climb out of the stomach
and return to the windghost’s mouth,
where another successful grapple check is
needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed
creature can try to cut its way out with
either claws or a light piercing or slashing
weapon. Dealing at least 25 points of damage to the stomach
(AC 20) in this way creates an opening large enough to
permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A Huge windghost’s stomach
can hold 1 Medium-size, 4 Small, 16 Tiny, or 64 Diminutive
or smaller opponents.
Windsong (Su): Two or more windghosts within 90 feet
of each other can emit a harmonizing sonic drone that
throws off the equilibrium of any creature that hears it. The
sound causes any creature within 120 feet (except windghosts ) that fails a Will save (DC 23) to take a –6 circumstance penalty on Concentration checks, a –8 enhancement
penalty to Dexterity, and move at half normal speed. These
penalties remain as long as the windghosts continue to sing.
A successful save renders a creature immune to that particular pair of windghosts’ windsong for 24 hours. Windghosts
can end a windsong at will.
Fast Healing (Ex): A windghost regains lost hit points at
the rate of 3 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit points
lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not
allow the windghost to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Flight (Ex): A windghost is naturally buoyant and can fly
(as the spell) as a free action at a speed of 30 feet.
Immunities (Ex): Windghosts are immune to air and
mind-affecting effects.
True Seeing (Su): A windghost sees all things as if
affected by true seeing (arcane version).
199
WINDGHOST
JJ200
WYSTE
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 5d8+25 (47 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 10 ft., swim 40 ft.
AC: 18 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +9 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 17
Attacks: 7 tentacle rakes +7 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 1d4+6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Bite, improved grab
Special Qualities: Acid immunity, blindsight 120 ft.
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +2, Will +4
Abilities: Str 22, Dex 13, Con 20, Int 1, Wis 11, Cha 8
Skills: Listen +4, Spot +4, Swim +14
Feats: Alertness (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary, pair or school (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 6–15 HD (Huge)
The wyste (pronounced “wist”) is
an alien creature much like a giant
worm that inhabits fetid pools of
alien slime.
A typical specimen is 2 feet in
diameter and 25 feet long. A wyste’s
skin is translucent, showing strange, twisted
strands of pulsing organs underneath. The creature has no face, just a large sucker hole fringed by long,
claw-tipped tentacles. The tentacles allow the wyste to
feed and defend itself, and they also serve as sensory organs.
So far as is known, a wyste operates only by instinct and
lives to feed.
COMBAT
A wyste lunges up to 15 feet out of its slimy pools to attack
creatures that approach. Wystes in an area often attack as a
group; others nearby might be attracted by the commotion,
too. When a wyste kills a victim, it drags its prey away to be
consumed at leisure.
Bite (Ex): When a wyste grapples an opponent, its tentacles draw the victim to its toothed sucker hole. On the
round after the wyste grabs, it makes a regular attack with
its bite (in lieu of any claw attacks), gaining a +4 bonus on
the attack roll (+11 melee). If the bite attack misses, the
wyste drops the character, who falls prone in front of the
creature. If the bite attack is successful, the victim takes
1d6+9 points of damage. The wyste can then deal bite
damage automatically every round. The victim can escape
by winning an opposed grapple check against the wyste,
making a successful Escape Artist check against the wyste’s
grapple check result, or by killing the wyste.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a wyste hits a Large or smaller
opponent with one or more tentacle attacks, it deals normal
damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +17,
plus a +2 bonus for each tentacle that hit beyond the first).
The wyste can make only one grapple attack per round, no
matter how many tentacles it devotes to the effort. If it gets
a hold, it has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or
simply use its tentacles to hold the opponent (–20 penalty
on grapple check, but the wyste is not considered grappled).
In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals damage for all
the tentacles used to hold the opponent.
Blindsight (Ex): A wyste is blind, but its tentacles are sensory organs that can ascertain prey by scent and vibration. This
ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 120
feet. A wyste usually does not need to make Spot or Listen
checks to notice creatures within range of its blindsight.
YAK FOLK
Large Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 5d8+10 (32 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 16 (–1 size, +7 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Quarterstaff +9 melee, or falchion +8 melee
Damage: Quarterstaff 1d6+6, falchion 2d4+6/18–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Body meld
Special Qualities: Command genie, darkvision 60 ft., use staff
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +6
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 11, Con 15, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Disguise +10*, Heal +6, Innuendo +8, Knowledge
(arcana) +10, Use Magic Device +10
Feats: Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Weapon Focus
(quarterstaff )
Climate/Terrain: Any mountains
Organization: Solitary, pair, or herd (3–12 plus 1 leader of
1st–5th level and 1–2 humanoid or giant slaves per yak
folk), or tribe (11–20 plus 1 leader of 5th–12th level, 1–2
lieutenants of 1st–5th level, 1–2 humanoid or giant
slaves per yak folk, and a force of 10–40 fighting slaves)
WYSTEChallenge Rating: 4
Treasure: Standard plus staff (see below)
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: By character class
Yak folk are humanoid yaks who walk about on their hind
legs, dress in fine clothing, and dabble in magic. They are
slightly smaller than minotaurs, but aside from a vague
resemblance they have little in common with those creatures. Their shaggy fur is generally well groomed, and their
horns are often decorated with tassels or silver tips. Jewelry
is common, and they wear fine clothing of wool and silk. All
adult yak folk carry staffs that are often magical, and
most also arm themselves with falchions.
Yak folk live among remote mountain peaks and
valleys, inaccessible to all but the hardiest travelers
and explorers.
Yak folk speak Common.
COMBAT
Most yak folk use their falchions or staffs,
magical or otherwise, in combat.
Body Meld (Sp): Once per day a yak
folk can merge its body with that of a
humanoid or giant of Small to Large
size. Except where noted here, this
power functions like a magic jar
spell heightened to 9th
level (caster level 20th;
Will save DC 21 negates).
To use this ability, the yak
folk must touch the intended target
for 20 minutes without interruption (yak
folk usually restrain their victims while
using this ability). At the end of this
period, the target must make a Will save
to remain conscious. On a failed save, the
host’s mind becomes unconscious, and the
yak folk assumes control. There is no magic
jar per se—the yak folk physically merges
its body with the victim’s body without the
use of an intermediate vessel. Body meld lasts
until dispelled or dismissed.
The process works only on humans, elves, dwarves, halforcs, and any creature of the giant type. The yak folk shares
all the victim’s knowledge, memories, skills, feats, and
extraordinary abilities, but none of its spell-like or supernatural abilities. The yak folk retains all of its own supernatural and spell-like abilities. The merging does not shed
a magical aura (so a detect magic spell does not reveal it),
but a true seeing spell reveals the victim’s dual nature.
If the host body is slain, the yak folk dies with it. Separating the two bodies takes half as long as melding (10 minutes). The host regains consciousness 1d6 minutes after the
separation is complete.
Only characters who know the victim personally have
any chance to realize that something is wrong, by making a
Spot check opposed by the yak folk’s Disguise check (which
in this case represents how well the yak folk impersonates
its host).
Command Genie (Su): Once per day, a yak folk can
summon and command a janni of evil alignment, but it can
never have more than one janni under its control at one time.
The janni is a slave bound to serve until the second sunrise
after the summoning. The yak folk are greatly disliked by all
genies, but for reasons lost in antiquity, no genie can attack a
yak folk. Genies sometimes work to thwart the yak folk’s
plans or disrupt their lives in other, indirect ways, but even
this is done cautiously because the genies know that if they
antagonize the yak folk too much, the lives of enslaved jann
will only become worse and their tasks more onerous.
Use Staff (Ex): A yak folk can use
any magic staff. This ability is similar to
the Use Magic Device skill except that
it applies only to magic staffs and the
yak folk does not require a skill check.
The chance that any particular yak folk possesses a magic staff is equal to its Hit Dice × 5%.
YAK FOLK SOCIETY
Yak folk settle in secluded mountain valleys,
creating realms that are sheltered from the
worst of nature’s abuse—havens of greenery and life in the midst of barren, snowcovered peaks. In these seemingly idyllic
hideaways, the yak folk rule over their human,
elf, or dwarf subjects with iron fists.
The yak folk, for all their learning
and culture, are enormously evil overlords. They care for their hapless subjects only to
the extent that a live serf is better than a dead one,
and keeping a serf alive is easier than working
oneself.
Outsiders stumbling into an enclave of yak folk
are usually surprised and pleased to find what
appears to be a utopia hidden in the mountains,
and the yak folk do all in their power to foster that image
until the strangers can be disarmed and enslaved.
Their cities consist of several thousand yak folk plus five
or six times as many enslaved minions. A city is surrounded
by smaller enclaves and tribal outposts.
YAK FOLK CHARACTERS
A yak folk’s favored class is sorcerer. Most yak folk leaders
are sorcerers or sorcerer/clerics. Yak folk clerics tend to venerate chaotic and evil gods and often have access to the Evil
and Trickery domains.
A yak folk PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 7. Thus, a 1st-level yak folk sorcerer has an
ECL of 8 and is the equivalent of an 8th-level character.
201
YAK FOLK202
YUGOLOTH
Possibly the greediest, most selfish beings in the Outer
Planes, yugoloths reign supreme among the evil outsiders
of the plane of Gehenna.
Yugoloths often act as mercenaries for demons, devils, and
other planar powers. They are enthusiastic bodyguards and soldiers because they take such glee in hurting others, but they
turn on their masters if the enemy makes them a better offer.
They also make good torturers, because they delight in misery.
The yugoloths are led by a yugoloth of surpassing power
known as the General of Gehenna, who rules with an iron
fist—exactly as far as his reach extends. There is no widespread
or organized opposition to his rule, but yugoloths outside his
immediate sphere of influence have little hesitation about
acting independently. The General rules from the Crawling
City, a great metropolis supported by thousands of graftedtogether legs that slowly wanders the volcanic Gehennan landscape.
Whatever their form, yugoloths tend to have the smell of
brimstone around them. In their native form, they leave a
faint trail of ash unless they consciously choose not to.
Yugoloths speak Abyssal, Draconic, and Infernal.
COMBAT
In general, yugoloths are focused combatants. They choose
one opponent out of a group and attack until it falls, then
move on to the next foe. They fight at a frantic pace, using
their best attacks and spell-like abilities right away, even if
they’re not sure what they’re facing.
All yugoloths have the following special abilities in common.
Outsider Traits: A yugoloth has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Summon Yugoloth (Sp): Most yugoloths can summon
others of their kind as though casting a summon monster
spell, but they have only a limited chance of success. Roll
d%: On a failure, no yugoloths answer the summons. Summoned creatures remain for 1 hour, then return whence
they came. A yugoloth that is itself summoned cannot use
its own summon ability for 1 hour.
Yugoloth Traits: A yugoloth is immune to poison and
acid. It has cold, fire, and electricity resistance 20. Yugoloths
can communicate telepathically with any creature within
100 feet that has a language.
MARRAENOLOTH
The marraenoloths serve a specialized function, possibly the
most specialized of any of the yugoloths. They are the ferrymen
on the River Styx, somberly poling their ghastly crafts along
that sepulchral river and through all the horrid planes it visits.
These pallid humanoids are little more than skeletons
clothed in rotted robes and grave wrappings. Only their
red-glowing eyes show signs of life. Like all natives of
Gehenna, they are pitiless and mercenary. They can speak
any language, but they communicate with other marraenoloths telepathically.
Only by remaining scrupulously neutral in their dealings with all others do the marraenoloths retain the ability
to move freely throughout the evil-aligned Outer Planes.
They can move away from the River Styx, but
YUGOLOTH
DRtheir skiffs cannot, and a marraenoloth seldom goes anywhere its boat can’t take it.
Marraenoloths never carry cargo, only passengers. Payment must be made in advance and must be at least 100 gp
per passenger. Although marraenoloths seldom, if ever, get
lost on the labyrinthine channels of the Styx, there is a 15%
chance on any chartered journey that the boatman delivers
the passengers into an ambush, arranged and paid for by a
third party. Each additional 100 gp paid per passenger
reduces the chance by 5%.
Combat
Marraenoloths rely almost exclusively on their spell-like
abilities for offense and defense.
Fear Gaze (Su): When a marraenoloth stares at a creature, the latter must succeed at a Will saving throw (DC 15)
or become shaken for 1d4 rounds. This is a mind-affecting
fear effect.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—alter self, animate dead,
charm person, phantasmal killer, poison, produce flame, teleport
without error. Caster level 10th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Summon Yugoloth (Sp): Once per day, a marraenoloth
can summon another marraenoloth with a 75% chance of
success.
ARCANALOTH
Arcanaloths are the scribes, record-keepers, negotiators, and
deal-makers for the yugoloths of Gehenna. As such, they are
203
YUGOLOTH
Marraenoloth Arcanaloth Yagnoloth
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil) Medium-Size Outsider (Evil) Large Outsider (Evil)
Hit Dice: 10d8 (45 hp) 12d8 (54 hp) 10d8+40 (85 hp)
Initiative: +2 +7 +2
Speed: 50 ft. 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (poor) 50 ft.
AC: 21 (+2 Dex, +9 natural), 28 (+3 Dex, +15 natural), 21 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +10
touch 12, flat-footed 19 touch 13, flat-footed 25 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 19
Attacks: Bite +11 melee 2 claws +12 melee and bite Greatsword +9/+4 melee and
+7 melee claw +20 melee, or greataxe
+9/+4 melee and claw +20 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6+1 Claw 1d4 plus poison, bite 1d6 Greatsword 2d6/19–20, greataxe
1d12/×3, claw 1d6+10 plus
stunning blow
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear gaze, spell-like abilities Poison, spell-like abilities, Breath weapon, energy drain,
spells shocking grasp, stunning blow
Special Qualities: Outsider traits, SR 21, DR 15/+3, outsider traits, DR 15/+1, outsider traits, SR 25,
yugoloth traits partial immunity to spells, SR 24, muscular arm, yugoloth traits
yugoloth traits
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +9 Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +14 Fort +11, Ref +9, Will +9
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 15, Con 10, Str 11, Dex 16, Con 11, Str 30, Dex 14, Con 19,
Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 10 Int 20, Wis 18, Cha 17 Int 15, Wis 15, Cha 16
Skills: Appraise +14, Balance +15, Bluff +17, Concentration +14, Climb +22, Concentration +17,
Bluff +13, Diplomacy +2, Diplomacy +19, Gather Diplomacy +5, Intimidate +16,
Intimidate +2, Intuit Direction Information +18, Innuendo Jump +20, Knowledge (the planes)
+15, Knowledge (the planes) +19, Intimidate +20, Knowledge +15, Listen +15, Sense Motive
+14, Listen +4, Profession (arcana) +19, Knowledge (the +15, Spot +15
(boater) +13, Spot +4, Swim +13 planes) +19, Profession (scribe)
+19, Sense Motive +19,
Spellcraft +20
Feats: Alertness, Combat Casting, Empower Spell, Improved Cleave, Power Attack, Weapon
Dodge Initiative, Iron Will, Spell Focus Focus (claw)
(Abjuration)
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary Solitary, pair, or embassy (3–4) Solitary
Challenge Rating: 10 17 10
Treasure: Standard (coins only) Standard Standard
Alignment: Always neutral evil Always neutral evil Always neutral evil
Advancement: 11–20 HD (Medium-size) 13–24 HD (Medium-size) 11–30 HD (Large)204
grasping, wheedling manipulators, but at least they’re generally true to their word.
An arcanaloth has humanoid form but the head of a jackal
or dog. It dresses finely but is businesslike and abrupt, if not
downright surly.
Arcanaloths can speak and write any language.
Combat
Arcanaloths are weak in melee, but they are powerful spellcasters. In addition to all the usual powers of yugoloths,
arcanaloths have the following special abilities.
Partial Immunity to Spells: Mind-affecting spells have
no effect on arcanaloths.
Poison (Ex): An arcanaloth’s claws are coated with
poison. It delivers this poison (Fortitude save DC 16) with
each successful claw attack. The initial and secondary
damage is the same (1 point of Strength damage).
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—darkness, fly, heat metal,
invisibility (self only), magic missile, shapechange, telekinesis,
warp wood; 1/day—fear, major image. Caster level 12th; save
DC 13 + spell level.
Spells: An arcanaloth can cast arcane spells as a 12th-level
sorcerer (spells known 9/5/5/4/3/2/1; spells/day 6/7/7/
7/6/5/3; save DC 13 + spell level, or 15 + spell level for Abjuration spells).
Summon Yugoloth (Sp): Once per day, an arcanaloth can
summon another arcanaloth with a 40% chance of success.
YAGNOLOTH
In the simplistic feudal hierarchy of Gehenna, yagnoloths
are minor lords. Each rules over a territory, with vassal
yugoloths at its beck and call. The rationale behind this
arrangement is not clear, since yagnoloths are neither
stronger nor brighter than many of their subjects. Whatever the reason, the ruling powers of Gehenna enforce the
existing order, and the yagnoloths profit from it.
In fact, the yagnoloths squeeze every advantage possible
from their positions, up to and including sanctioning executions of yugoloths that are considerably more physically
and magically powerful than themselves, but lower in the
hierarchy. Such actions are little different from what any
yugoloth would do if given the opportunity. Nonetheless,
the fact that the yagnoloths’ authority exceeds their personal power has earned them a special sort of resentment.
No other yugoloth can pass up an opportunity to betray its
yagnoloth overlord—for the right price.
As a secondary effect of their despised status, yagnoloths
cannot summon other yugoloths.
A yagnoloth is humanoid and stands 10 to 15 feet tall. Its
hide is red and scaly; its head is small and skeletal and
topped by ears resembling bats’ wings. A yagnoloth’s favored
arm is enormous, thickly knotted with muscles, and long
enough to drag on the ground. It uses this arm for its claw
attack. The other arm appears small in comparison and is
about the size of a normal human arm. This arm is always
the one it uses to wield a weapon. The weapon may be a
magic item but is never a specific weapon or one with a special ability. A yagnoloth that possessed such a weapon would
be assassinated in short order by its underlings.
Combat
A yagnoloth always attacks with both arms in melee. It wields
a greataxe or greatsword with its smaller arm, but that arm is
fairly weak (Str 10) and the yagnoloth does not receive any
Strength bonus when using it.
Breath Weapon (Su): As a standard action, a yagnoloth
can exhale a cloud of acid every 1d4 rounds. This cloud
affects a single 5-foot cone for 1 round. A character in that
space must make a Reflex saving throw (DC 19); failure
means the character takes 2d6 points of acid damage and is
stunned for an equal number of rounds.
Energy Drain (Su): The truly horrific power of the yagnoloth is its ability to drain life force. The victim must be
unconscious or stunned. The yagnoloth places its head
against the victim’s flesh. For each full round the yagnoloth
remains in contact, the victim gains 1d4 negative levels. The
Fortitude save DC to remove each negative level is 18.
Shocking Grasp (Sp): A yagnoloth can use this ability three
times per day, causing 1d8+10 points of electricity damage
each time. Caster level 10th.
Stunning Blow (Ex): Any character struck by a yagnoloth’s massive arm must make a Fortitude saving (DC 25)
to avoid being stunned for a number of rounds equal to the
points of damage dealt by the blow.
Muscular Arm (Ex): A yagnaloth’s larger arm functions
as a primary natural weapon, even when it is used to make
secondary attacks. This ability negates any secondary attack
penalty and allows the yagnaloth its full Strength bonus
with its claw, whether the attack is primary or secondar94
ETHER SCARAB
Tiny Outsider
Hit Dice: 1d8 (4 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: 10 ft.
AC: 14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), touch 14, flat-footed 12
Attacks: Bite +2 melee
Damage: Bite 1d3–1
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Wounding
Special Qualities: Death burst, outsider traits, planar rip
Saves: Fort+2, Ref +4, Will +1
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 1, Wis 9, Cha 4
Skills: Hide +11, Listen +0, Spot +0
Feats: Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, cluster (3–5), or swarm (6–11)
Challenge Rating: 1
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 2–3 HD (Small)
These panicky, harmless-looking beetles are native to the
Ethereal Plane. A wide variety of ethereal predators eat ether
scarabs, so the latter have developed the ability to flee across
planar boundaries. They often appear on the Material Plane
next to buildings or other large objects near which they
have made their lairs on the Ethereal Plane.
An ether scarab has six tentaclelike legs and a hard,
amethyst-veined, chitinous shell marked by
swirling, colorful patterns. It sports
two pairs of
vicious-looking mandibles, which it uses to tear through
planar boundaries.
COMBAT
The timid ether scarab almost always runs from trouble. If
forced into battle, it bites with its mandibles. Ether scarabs
do not enjoy the gravity of the Material Plane, so they return
to their home plane as soon as it is safe to do so.
Wounding (Ex): A wound resulting from an ether scarab’s
bite attack bleeds for an additional 1 point of damage per
round thereafter. Multiple wounds from such attacks result in
cumulative bleeding loss (two wounds for 2 points of damage
per round, and so on). The bleeding can be stopped only by a
successful Heal check (DC 10) or the application of a cure spell
or some other healing spell (heal, healing circle, or the like).
Death Burst (Ex): An ether scarab that dies on the Material Plane explodes harmlessly, causing a planar rip (see above)
between the Material Plane and the Ethereal Plane. This hole
in the planar fabric lasts 1d4+1 rounds.
Outsider Traits: An ether scarab has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Planar Rip (Su): By ripping at the planar fabric with its
mandibles, an ether scarab can create a two-way portal
between its own plane and another (usually the Material).
This hole between the planes appears tiny, but it can accommodate any Large or smaller creature traveling in either
direction. A planar rip closes in 1d4+1 rounds.
ETHEREAL
DOPPELGANGER
Medium-Size Shapechanger
Hit Dice: 20d8 (90 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 14 (+1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 2 claws +16 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4–1
Special Attacks: Assume identity, brain lock,
mind wipe
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 25/+3, fast
healing 8, plane shift, SR 20
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +13, Will +13
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 15
Skills: Bluff +12, Diplomacy +6, Disguise +25,
Intimidate +4, Listen +3, Sense Motive +11, Spot +7
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Dodge, Expertise,
Improved Initiative, Mobility, Weapon Finesse (claw)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary or squad (1 plus 4–16 jann)
Challenge Rating: 15
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil
Advancement: By character class
ETHER
SCARAB
DREthereal doppelgangers live on the Ethereal Plane, in
buildings that serve as combination showrooms, vaults,
prisons, and shops. Ethereal doppelgangers are fond of
magic items, and they frequently visit the Material Plane
to acquire new ones for their collections. During their
stays there, they usually disguise themselves as members
of some other race. An ethereal doppelganger often interacts with or joins an adventuring party that it believes can
lead it to, or near, a magic item it desires.
In its natural form, an ethereal doppelganger appears as a
gangly humanoid with slick skin and white eyes that have
no pupils. While traveling on the Material Plane, it usually
takes the form of an attractive member of the same race as
the group it has joined.
An ethereal doppelganger speaks Common, Infernal,
and at least one elemental language (Auran, Aquan, Ignan,
or Terran).
COMBAT
When it plans an extended stay on the
Material Plane, an ethereal doppelganger uses its brain lock ability to
render a chosen subject helpless,
then takes that creature back to its
floating home on the Ethereal Plane.
In its sanctum, the doppelganger
makes the subject comfortable and
offers a deal. If the subject allows the
doppelganger to assume his or her
identity and acquire the desired item,
the doppelganger will ensure the subject’s comfort in the interim and
return him or her unharmed to any
desired location on the Material
Plane afterward. If the subject
refuses, the doppelganger wipes
any memory of itself from the
subject’s mind, returns the creature to the Material Plane, and
tries again with a new subject.
Should the subject agree to the deal
and then attempt to escape, the doppelganger sells him or her into extraplanar slavery. But if the
subject accepts the agreement and complies with its terms,
the doppelganger is as good as its word.
Assume Identity (Su): An ethereal doppelganger can
absorb another creature’s mind, memories, and personality. This process requires 1 hour of unbroken physical contact per level or Hit Die of the subject. The target may
attempt a Will save (DC 22); if that is successful, the
process is negated and the ethereal doppelganger must
begin again. A willing creature can choose to waive the
saving throw.
After consuming the target creature’s identity, the ethereal doppelganger can assume its form with 100% accuracy.
The doppelganger possesses the other creature’s memories,
plus its alignment and all of its abilities, except for cleric
spells of 2nd level or higher, a paladin’s special abilities, and
other powers granted by deities. (This does not deprive the
subject of those memories or abilities; it only duplicates
them in the ethereal doppelganger.) The doppelganger
retains its own damage resistance, darkvision, fast healing,
and spell resistance in its new form.
If an ethereal doppelganger commits an act that runs
counter to its new identity’s alignment, it is immediately
forced back into its natural form for 1d10 rounds. It still
retains the basic memories of the assumed identity, though
not the deeper memories. If the subject dies before the contract is complete, the ethereal doppelganger immediately
reverts to its natural form and loses all of that subject’s memories and abilities.
Brain Lock (Su): As a standard
action, an ethereal doppelganger
can lock away the higher mind of an
opponent up to 300 feet away, provided both are on the same plane
and the doppelganger has line of
sight to its subject. A successful
Will save (DC 22) negates the
attempt; failure leaves the subject
mentally paralyzed. A brain-locked
creature is not stunned, so attackers get no special advantage against
it. Furthermore, it can still defend
itself against attacks (its Dexterity
bonus to AC, if any, still applies), but it
cannot move or initiate any actions. A
brain lock can negate various forms of
special movement and cause harm to
the creature thereby. For example, a
brain-locked flying creature falls
because it cannot flap its wings,
and a brain-locked swimming creature may drown because it can no
longer move its limbs. The effect
lasts 20 rounds, but it can be dismissed earlier.
Mind Wipe (Su): With any successful melee touch
attack, an ethereal doppelganger can wipe all memory of its
existence from an opponent’s mind (no saving throw).
Fast Healing (Ex): An ethereal doppelganger regains lost
hit points at the rate of 3 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the ethereal doppelganger to regrow or
reattach lost body parts.
Plane Shift (Sp): An ethereal doppelganger can use plane
shift (caster level 20th; Will save DC 17) at will.
95
ETHEREAL
DOPPELGANGER96
ETHEREAL SLAYER
Medium-Size Outsider (Chaotic, Evil)
Hit Dice: 16d8+32 (104 hp)
Initiative: +8
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 24 (+4 Dex, +10 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 20
Attacks: 2 claws +18 melee and bite +15 melee
Damage: Claw 1d8+1, bite 1d6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Qualities: Detect magic, dimensional anchor, DR
20/+2, outsider traits, plane shift, SR 23
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +14, Will +13
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 19, Con 14, Int 5, Wis 16, Cha 9
Skills: Hide +20, Jump +17, Listen +21, Move Silently +20,
Spot +21
Feats: Alertness, Dodge, Improved Initiative, Weapon
Finesse (bite), Weapon Focus (claw)
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 17–24 HD (Medium-size); 25–32 HD
(Large); 33–40 HD (Huge); 41–48 HD (Gargantuan)
Ethereal slayers are carnivorous predators that lie in
ambush on the Ethereal Plane, waiting for unwitting creatures to enter. They typically
wait in spots
that have significant cross-planar traffic, such as beside
Material Plane buildings that are rich in magical auras. If
several attempts have already been made to access a particular Material Plane location via ethereal travel, there is
a good chance that a slayer has taken notice and gravitated
to that spot.
A spiny, chitinous shell armors an ethereal slayer’s body,
and four mandibles surround its drooling mouth. It has
two thick, birdlike legs and two arms that end in wicked,
four-foot claws, like those of a praying mantis.
COMBAT
Ethereal slayers are ambush predators. They use their detect
magic ability to locate strong magical auras, then wait near
them for creatures to travel past on the Ethereal Plane.
When a creature appears nearby, the slayer uses its dimensional anchor ability to fix its prey on the Ethereal Plane,
then attacks with its claws. Should its opponent manage to
flee to the Material Plane, the slayer uses its plane shift ability to pursue.
Detect Magic (Su): An ethereal slayer can produce a
detect magic effect (caster level 9th) at will.
Dimensional Anchor (Su): An ethereal slayer can produce a dimensional anchor effect (caster level 9th) at will.
Outsider Traits: An ethereal slayer has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Plane Shift (Su): Twice per day, an ethereal slayer can
produce a plane shift effect (caster level 9th; self only; save
DC 14).
FAMINE SPIRIT
Medium-Size Undead
Hit Dice: 32d12 (208 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 60 ft.
AC: 18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Bite +19 melee and 2 claws +17 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+3/19–20/vorpal bite, claw 1d6+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Aura of pain, vorpal bite
Special Qualities: Create spawn, ethereal jaunt, fast healing 10, scent, see invisibility, undead traits
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +10, Will +20
Abilities: Str 16, Dex 11, Con —, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 15
Skills: Listen +37, Search +36, Spot +37
Feats: Cleave, Expertise, Great Cleave, Improved Bull
Rush, Improved Critical (bite), Improved Initiative,
Improved Trip, Multiattack, Power Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, brood (3–5), or band (2–5
plus 2–8 ghasts and 4–16 ghouls)
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None
ETHEREAL
SLAYERAlignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 33–64 HD (Medium-size)
The famine spirit, also called a ravenous ghoul, is a corporeal undead motivated entirely by hunger. It seeks to consume in death all that it was denied in life. It eats everything and anything that a living being could, but its
hunger is never sated. A famine spirit can consume the
comestibles of a Mordenkainen’s magnificent mansion
(caster level 14th) in a mere 5 hours and still be hungry
for more. In a day, it can consume as many as one hundred humans.
A famine spirit appears as an obscenely obese humanoid or monstrous humanoid with a mouth full of
razor-sharp teeth. Should the need present itself, a
famine spirit can unhinge its jaw to swallow objects
too large for it to consume normally.
Undead are among the few creatures that a famine
spirit does not eat, so it may attract groups of ghouls and
ghasts that serve it and feast in its wake.
COMBAT
Famine spirits ignore most other living things, turning on
them only if they get in the way of its feasting, or if there
is nothing else to consume. It fights primarily with its
jaws, attempting to bite off the heads of any opponents.
Aura of Pain (Su): The famine spirit radiates a continual
symbol of pain effect (save DC 28) as a 60-foot-radius emanation. A creature that fails its save is affected while within
the area and for 10 minutes after leaving it. A successful
save makes a creature immune to that famine spirit’s aura of
pain for 24 hours.
Vorpal Bite (Ex): The bite of a famine spirit severs the
head of a Large or smaller opponent on a critical hit.
Create Spawn (Su): A famine spirit rarely leaves corpses
in its wake, but sometimes it is forced to flee and leave slain
opponents behind. Each of these corpses rises in 1d3 days as
a famine spirit, unless a protection from evil spell is cast upon
it before that time.
Ethereal Jaunt (Su): Three times per day, a famine spirit
can produce an ethereal jaunt effect (caster level 20th). It uses
this ability primarily to enter storehouses or to deal with
ethereal interlopers.
See Invisibility (Su): A famine spirit can see invisible
objects and beings as if under the effect of a see invisibility
spell. This ability is always active.
Undead Traits: A famine spirit is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. A famine spirit cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision (60-
foot range).
FELLDRAKE
The small, wingless dragons known as felldrakes trace their
origin to Bahamut the Platinum Dragon. After helping a
group of powerful elf wizards turn back a demonic invasion,
Bahamut created the felldrakes to guard the elves against future incursions. All felldrakes have the blood of Bahamut in
their veins and are fierce, loyal, and good at heart.
Felldrakes speak Draconic and Sylvan.
COMBAT
Felldrakes are impulsive attackers. Aggressive and eager to
fight, they seek to close with opponents immediately.
Dragon Traits: Felldrakes are immune to sleep and paralysis effects. They have darkvision (60-foot range) and lowlight vision.
CRESTED FELLDRAKE
Elves often employ crested felldrakes as guards for settlements and in border patrols.
A crested felldrake looks like a small, wingless dragon
with powerful hind legs and a bright crest on its head.
Combat
When crested felldrakes fight in a group, some charge into
battle and try to pin down the enemy, while their comrades
move to encircle the foe.
97
FELLDRAKE98
SPITTING FELLDRAKE
Because of its snaky body, a spitting felldrake can squeeze
through small spaces. Thus, it is ideal for the underground
expeditions so contrary to elven nature.
The spitting felldrake is slightly
larger than its crested cousin. Its
body is long and sinuous, like
that of a snake.
Combat
A spitting felldrake usually
pauses to spit acid before
closing to melee. It can spit
acid up to 30 feet as a
ranged touch attack with
no range increment.
HORNED FELLDRAKE
Horned felldrakes are often
used to protect important individuals or cities.
This creature is larger than
the other felldrakes. Its head
sports several horns, which it uses to
impale foes.
Combat
Horned felldrakes usually charge foes first, then use their
horns in melee.
FELLDRAKE
Crested Felldrake Spitting Felldrake Horned Felldrake
Small Dragon Medium-Size Dragon Medium-Size Dragon
Hit Dice: 2d12+4 (17 hp) 3d12+3 (22 hp) 4d12+8 (34 hp)
Initiative: +0 +2 +0
Speed: 40 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
AC: 15 (+1 size, +4 natural), 16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), 17 (+7 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 15 touch 12, flat-footed 14 touch 10, flat-footed 17
Attacks: Bite +3 melee Bite +6 melee, or spit +5 Horn +8 melee
ranged touch
Damage: Bite 1d8 Bite 1d6+3, spit 2d4 acid Horn 2d6+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./ 5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — — Charge 4d6+6
Special Qualities: Dragon traits, scent Dragon traits Dragon traits
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +3, Will +4 Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +3 Fort +6, Ref +4, Will +5
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 10, Con 15, Str 14, Dex 15, Con 13, Str 17, Dex 10, Con 15,
Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 9 Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 9 Int 5, Wis 12, Cha 8
Skills: Hide +6, Jump +2, Listen +5, Hide +7, Jump +4, Listen +4, Hide +3, Jump +6, Listen +6,
Spot +5 Spot +4 Spot +6
Feats: Alertness Weapon Focus (bite) Alertness, Weapon Focus (horn)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Temperate plains, forest, hills Any land and underground
and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), or Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), or
pack (4–16) pack (4–16)
Challenge Rating: 1 2 3
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral good Always neutral good Always neutral good
Advancement: 3–4 HD (Small); 4–9 HD (Medium-size) 5–8 HD (Medium-size);
5–6 HD (Medium-size) 9–12 HD (Large)Charge (Ex): A horned felldrake typically begins a battle
by charging at its opponent. In addition to the normal benefits and hazards of a charge, this allows the horned felldrake
to make a single horn attack (+8 melee) that deals 4d6+6
points of damage.
FIENDWURM
Gargantuan Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 24d10+216 (348 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 60 ft., burrow 60 ft.
AC: 27 (–4 size, +1 Dex, +20 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 26
Attacks: Bite +33 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+19
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks:
Death rift,
demonic belch,
improved grab,
swallow whole
Special Qualities:
Acidic hide, acid
immunity, darkvision
60 ft., DR 15/–, low-light
vision, portal, tremorsense
Saves: Fort +23, Ref +15,
Will +10
Abilities: Str 36,
Dex 13, Con 29,
Int 7, Wis 14, Cha 8
Skills: Intuit Direction
+9, Listen +11, Spot +12
Feats: Alertness, Dodge,
Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any desert, plains, and underground
Organization: Solitary or troupe (1 plus 2–8 dretches,
quasits, or vrocks)
Challenge Rating: 28
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 25–72 HD (Colossal)
A fiendwurm is the result of demonic magic applied to an
ordinary earthworm. This tormented monster is constantly
wracked with unbearable pain from the planar portal embedded in its belly. Eating relieves the creature’s pain for a short
while, so it attempts to swallow any creature it encounters.
Its tortured existence keeps it constantly on the hunt.
A fiendwurm is a 40-foot-long, serpentine creature with a
mottled gray and pink hide. Its huge maw is filled with long,
snakelike fangs. The creature is never at rest; its intense pain
causes it to writhe and squirm constantly.
Fiendwurms are in such terrible agony that they are
unable to communicate at all.
COMBAT
A fiendwurm immediately lunges to bite and swallow any
living creature it chances upon. If it seems to be overmatched,
it uses its demonic belch ability to summon aid. A fiendwurm does not stop attacking until it is slain.
Death Rift (Su): Upon its death, a fiendwurm’s portal
implodes. Every creature within 5 feet of the fiendwurm
that fails a Reflex save (DC 31) is drawn into the collapsing
portal and transported to the Abyss. The implosion destroys
the fiendwurm’s body along with the portal. Thus, any creatures transported to the Abyss via a death rift must find
another means of returning to their original planes.
Demonic Belch (Su): Three times per day, a fiendwurm
can use its connection with the Abyss to bring 1d4 demons
to its aid. It expels these creatures from its mouth
with a great belching
sound. The demons arrive
unharmed, but the fiendwurm’s
pain may cause it to attack
them thereafter, if they
seem to be easier prey than
the opponents, or if there
are no other creatures
left to eat. Roll d%
to determine the
kind of demons
that arrive: 01–50
jovocs, 51–75 quasits,
76–100 vrocks. These
demons cannot use
their summoning abilities for one hour after being snatched out of the
Abyss. Once a fiendwurm uses this ability, it must wait 1d4
rounds before using it again.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a fiendwurm hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a bite
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple
as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +49). If it gets a hold, it can try to swallow
the opponent in the next round. Alternatively, the fiendwurm has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or
simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the fiendwurm is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A fiendwurm can swallow a
grabbed opponent that is at least two size categories smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple
bonus +49). Once inside the fiendwurm, the opponent takes
2d8+13 points of bludgeoning damage and 1d8 points of acid
damage per round from the creature’s gizzard. A successful
99
FIENDWURM100
grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of
the gizzard and return to the fiendwurm’s mouth, where
another successful grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with
either claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing
at least 25 points of damage to the gizzard (AC 20) in this way
creates an opening large enough to permit escape. Once a
single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the
hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own
way out. A Gargantuan fiendwurm’s gizzard can hold 2 Huge,
8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128 Small or smaller creatures.
Acidic Hide (Ex): A fiendwurm produces a highly
caustic mucus that coats its entire body. Touching its hide
deals 3d6 points of acid damage to an organic creature or
object, 5d8 points of acid damage to a metallic creature or
object, or 1d10 points of acid damage to a stony creature
(such as an earth elemental) or object. A gallon or more of
water is needed to wash off the mucus.
Portal (Su): Lining the lowest part of the fiendwurm’s
gizzard is a portal to the Abyss that is activated by the presence of a living creature. A swallowed creature must make
a Reflex save (DC 31) each round to avoid falling into or
being squeezed through the portal. The Abyssal side of the
portal is stationary, but the other side moves with the
fiendwurm. If this portal is permanently closed, the fiendwurm instantly dies but does not implode.
Tremorsense (Ex): A fiendwurm can automatically
sense the location of anything within 120 feet that is in
contact with the ground.
FIHYR
Fihyrs are the collected fears of humanity made corporeal.
These creatures were once thought to be related to beholders, but in fact there is no connection between the two kinds
of monsters aside from a superficial resemblance.
As the remnants of hundreds of people’s nightmares swirl
through the ether, they somehow combine with leftover magical power and coalesce into these physical monsters. A few
random dream images aren’t enough; it takes the strong emotional energy of a mass of people under duress to spawn a fihyr.
The right combination of conditions is most often found in
cities that are under siege, or being terrorized by monsters, or
suffering from famine, civil war, or some other mass trauma.
Great fihyrs are larger, more intelligent, and much more
dangerous than the smaller variety. A great fihyr forms
when a number of small fihyrs combine.
All fihyrs have the same general appearance; the two kinds
differ mainly in size. A fihyr is a roughly spherical blob of soft
tissue and pulsating gray matter, much like a gigantic brain
with a partial layer of skin stretched over it. The body of a
fihyr is about 2 feet in diameter; that of a great fihyr is closer
to 7 feet. Two large tentacles hang below the body and serve as
the creature’s legs. A mass of much smaller, constantly
writhing and twining tentacles projects from its body; these
help it maintain its balance. Numerous mouths and eyes are
placed at random along the “front” side of the creature’s body.
The eyes are a startling gold color with horizontal black
pupils, and the mouths are lined with needle-sharp teeth. The
mottled skin of a fihyr runs the full spectrum of colors, but
FIHYR
Fihyr Great Fihyr
Small Aberration Medium-Size Aberration
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp) 16d8 +16 (88 hp)
Initiative: +3 +6
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (good)
AC: 18 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +4 natural), 18 (+2 Dex, +6 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 15 touch 12, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Bite +2 melee 4 bites +12 melee
Damage: Bite 1d4–2 Bite 2d6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Frightful presence Emotion control, frightful presence
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., SR 10, vulnerable to sunlight Darkvision 60 ft., invisibility, SR 18
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +4, Will +5 Fort +8, Ref +9, Will +14
Abilities: Str 7, Dex 16, Con 10, Int 5, Wis 12, Cha 7 Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 15
Skills: Hide +10, Move Silently +9, Spot +8 Hide +16, Move Silently +21, Open Lock +17,
Spot +12
Feats: — Dodge, Great Fortitude, Improved Initiative,
Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes
Climate/Terrain: Any city, town, or village Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or brood (3–4) Solitary
Challenge Rating: 3 15
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Small); 9–12 HD (Medium-size) 17–24 HD (Medium-size); 25–48 HD (Large)always in dull, sickly shades. An oily sheen covers the surface
of the creature’s body.
Fihyrs rarely survive beyond the night of their formation,
and they never leave the troubled area that spawned them.
Great fihyrs, on the other hand, survive until slain. They
have been known to wander for hundreds of miles, from
one tormented spot to another, feeding on the fear and
despair of the inhabitants.
COMBAT
Both kinds of fihyrs attack by biting. The real purpose of a
fihyr’s bite is not to deal damage, but to spread fear in others.
FIHYR
Fihyrs never hesitate to attack, but they prefer to do so in
front of as many witnesses as possible, to make use of their
frightful presence ability.
Frightful Presence (Ex): Any creature that witnesses a
fihyr attacking becomes panicked if it fails a Will save
(DC 10).
Vulnerable to Sunlight (Ex): Fihyrs die instantly when
exposed to sunlight, hissing and bubbling away into acrid
smoke. They have no fear of sunlight, however, and they don’t
seek shelter to wait out the day. Magical sunlight can destroy a
fihyr if it penetrates the creature’s spell resistance, though if
the fihyr succeeds at any allowed saving throw, it avoids the
instant death effect.
GREAT FIHYR
Great fihyrs begin any conflict by using their emotion control
ability to generate negative emotions on which they can feed.
Once they decide to become visible, they immediately attack
so as to use their frightful presence ability.
Great fihyrs are unaffected by sunlight, but they despise
it. Thus, they prefer to lay low during the day in dark,
secluded spots, such as caves, dungeons, abandoned buildings, and the like.
Frightful Presence (Ex): Any creature that witnesses a
great fihyr attacking becomes panicked if it fails a Will save
(DC 20).
Emotion Control (Sp): At will, the great fihyr can produce
an effect like that of an emotion spell (despair, fear, or hate
only; caster level 16th; Will save DC 16), except that its
range is 260 feet, its radius is 15 feet, and it lasts as long as
the creature concentrates on it. The great fihyr can use this
ability and remain invisible.
Invisibility (Ex): A great fihyr can become invisible at
will. This effect is like that of the invisibility spell, except
that the creature can remain invisible as long as it
wishes, even while using its emotion control ability. Normally, a great fihyr is visible only immediately after
delivering a melee attack.
FIRBOLG
Large Giant
Hit Dice: 13d8+78 (136 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 25 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +3 masterwork studded leather,
+12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Huge greatsword +21/+16 melee, or rock +10
ranged
Damage: Huge greatsword 2d8+19/19–20, rock 2d6+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Rock throwing, spell-like abilities, trample
2d8+19
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 3, rock
catching
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +5, Will +6
Abilities: Str 36, Dex 13, Con 23, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Knowledge (nature) +5, Move Silently +5, Spot +8,
Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: Deflect Arrows, Dodge, Improved Unarmed Strike
Climate/Terrain: Temperate hills and forest
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–8), squad (9–16), or
troop (20–40)
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
101
FIRBOLG102
Firbolgs are reclusive giants who tend to avoid contact with
humanoid races and even other kinds of giants. Unlike
some of the more brutish giantkin, firbolgs do not depend
heavily on raiding for subsistence, nor do they rely solely on
force to resolve problems.
A firbolg looks like a 10-foot-tall human and weighs
more than 800 pounds. Its skin is a fleshy pink color, and
it can have hair of almost any shade, although blond and
red are the most common.A firbolg of either gender
wears its hair long, and the typical male sports a great,
thick beard.
Firbolgs speak Giant and Common.
COMBAT
Firbolgs are both cautious and crafty. They
have learned to distrust and fear the “civilized” races, such as humans and
elves. If possible, they avoid
encounters with humanoids altogether, either by
hiding or by deception.
If forced to fight, firbolgs
employ effective combat strategy,
using the terrain and situation to best
effect. They always operate as a team, not
as a collection of individuals.
Rock Throwing (Ex): An adult firbolg
receives a +1 racial bonus on attack
rolls when throwing rocks. It can
throw rocks weighing 40 to 50
pounds each (Small objects) up to
five range increments (range
increment 130 feet).
Spell-Like Abilities:
1/day—alter self, detect magic,
feeblemind, know direction.
Caster level 13th; save
DC 12 + spell level.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn
each round, a firbolg can trample
opponents at least one size category smaller than itself.
This attack deals 2d8+19 points of bludgeoning damage.
A trampled opponent can attempt either an attack of
opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC 29) for
half damage.
Fast Healing (Ex): A firbolg regains lost hit points at the
rate of 3 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit points
lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not
allow the firbolg to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Rock Catching (Ex): A firbolg can catch Small, Mediumsize, or Large rocks (or projectiles of similar shape). Once
per round, a firbolg that would normally be hit by a rock
can make a Reflex save to catch it as a free action. The DC is
15 for a Small rock, 20 for a Medium-size one, and 25 for a
Large one. (If the projectile has a bonus on attack rolls
because of magic, the DC increases by that amount.) The firbolg must be ready for and aware of the attack.
FIRBOLG SOCIETY
Firbolgs usually live in well-fortified colonies, either in the
depths of the forest or in cavern complexes dug into hillsides. All firbolg settlements are protected by guard towers.
These creatures live primarily by hunting and gathering, but
each colony also practices simple agriculture.
FIRBOLG CHARACTERS
A troop of firbolgs usually has a
druid as its leader. Any other
ranked members have levels in
the barbarian class. A firbolg’s
favored class is druid.
A firbolg PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 18. Thus, a
1st-level firbolg druid has an ECL of 19 and
is the equivalent of a 19th-level character.
FIRE BAT
Small Elemental (Fire)
Hit Dice: 6d8–6 (21 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 10 ft., fly 50 ft. (good)
AC: 16 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Bite +8 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6–1 plus 1d6 fire
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Attach, burn, devour
Special Qualities: Blindsight 120
ft., elemental traits, fire subtype,
regeneration 5
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +8, Will +0
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 17,
Con 8, Int 6, Wis 7, Cha 5
Skills: Hide +15, Listen +9,
Spot +9
Feats: Flyby Attack, Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Elemental Plane of Fire or volcanoes
Organization: Solitary or swarm (11–20)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 7–12 HD (Small); 13–18 HD (Medium-size)
Fire bats are native to the Elemental Plane of Fire, but unlike
fire elementals, they are not composed solely of elemental
material. They can fly through the flames and magma of the
Elemental Plane of Fire as easily as normal bats fly through
FIRE BAT
MDthe air. They propel themselves by expelling heated gases
from tubes within their bodies, flapping their wings only to
steer during flight.
A fire bat cannot enter water or
any other nonflammable liquid. A
body of water is an impassible barrier unless the fire bat can
step, jump or fly over it.
Fire bats feed on living
creatures, attaching to targets and
devouring flesh until they are sated.
A sated fire bat has a 25% chance of
splitting into two hungry fire bats
during the next 24 hours.
A fire bat’s body is about
2 feet long, and its wingspan is about 4 feet. The
creature burns continuously with an unbearably hot, red flame,
which makes it look larger
than it really is. Until it is
slain and its body cools, it’s
impossible to tell that it is
not just swirling fire in the
shape of a large bat.
Fire elementals get along well
with fire bats, but salamanders,
efreet, and most other creatures of fire prey on them.
Such a check on their population is vital, since they not
only regenerate but also multiply very quickly where food
is plentiful. Without natural predators, they could overrun the entire Elemental Plane of Fire within weeks.
COMBAT
In combat, fire bats display a level of cunning that belies
their limited intelligence, dividing their attacks evenly
among all the possible targets. Once a fire bat is sated (see
devour, below), it breaks off and leaves the fight. When
one-fourth of the swarm is sated or slain, all the remaining fire bats break off and flee, only to shadow their prey
and attack again when the time is right. They repeat this
pattern until the whole swarm has fed.
Attach (Ex): If a fire bat hits with its bite attack, it latches
onto the opponent’s body. An attached fire bat is effectively
grappling its prey. The fire bat loses its Dexterity bonus to
AC (giving it an AC of 13) but holds on with great tenacity,
dealing 1d6 points of fire damage each round it remains
attached. An attached fire bat can be struck with a weapon
or grappled itself. To remove an attached fire bat through
grappling, the opponent must achieve a pin (see Grapple
in Chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook) against the fire bat.
Each grapple attempt subjects the opponent to the fire
bat’s burn attack.
Burn (Ex):
Any creature
that is hit by a
fire bat’s bite attack (or that hits
the fire bat with a
natural weapon or an
unarmed attack) must succeed at a Reflex save (DC 12)
or catch fire (see Catching
on Fire in Chapter 3 of the
DUNGEON MASTER’S Guide). The
fire burns for 1d4 rounds.
Immersing a fire bat in at least
10 gallons of water extinguishes its flames and prevents it from flying but does
not otherwise harm the creature. The fire bat’s flames
reignite after 10 rounds.
Devour (Ex): Once it is attached, a fire bat devours the
opponent’s flesh, automatically dealing 1d6–1 points of bite
damage and 1d6 points of fire damage each round it
remains attached. After dealing 6 points of damage, the
fire bat is sated; on the next round it detaches and flies
away to digest the meal.
Blindsight (Ex): A fire bat emits high-frequency
sounds, inaudible to most other creatures, that bounce off
nearby objects and creatures. This ability enables it to
discern objects and creatures within 120 feet. The fire
bat usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks
to notice creatures within range of its blindsight. A silence
spell negates this ability and forces the fire bat to rely on its
weak vision (which has a maximum range of 10 feet).
Elemental Traits (Ex): A fire bat is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits
or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Fire Subtype (Ex): A fire bat is immune to fire damage
but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw
for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes
half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Regeneration (Ex): Cold attacks deal normal damage to a
fire bat.
Skills: A fire bat receives a +4 racial bonus on Spot and Listen checks. *These bonuses are lost if its blindsight is negated.
FIRE BAT FAMILIARS
If your campaign uses the Improved Familiar feat from
Tome and Blood: A Guide Book to Wizards and Sorcerers, a fire
bat is an appropriate improved familiar for a 15th-level or
higher arcane spellcaster of the fire subtype. Like other
improved familiars, a fire bat familiar provides no special
benefits to its master beyond the standard familiar benefits (see Familiars in Chapter 3 of the Player’s Handbook).
103
FIRE BAT
JJ104
FLESH JELLY
Gargantuan Ooze
Hit Dice: 18d10+108 (237 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 4 (–4 size, –2 Dex), touch 4, flat-footed 4
Attacks: 4 slams +20 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+11
Space/Reach: 30 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Absorb, disease, engulf
Special Qualities: Blindsight, horrid stench, ooze traits
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +4, Will +1
Abilities: Str 32, Dex 6, Con 23, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest, plains or marsh
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 19–36 HD (Colossal)
A flesh jelly is a nauseating mound of stinking flesh that
gorges itself on any creatures unfortunate enough to cross
its path. These ravenous oozes are usually found in tropical regions.
A flesh jelly is a blob of soft, fleshy tissue surrounded by a
filthy membrane composed of skin, hair, and fur. When it
moves, a few of the loose bones inside it press against the
outer membrane, causing its disgusting body to bulge out
here and there. The creature has no eyes, ears, or mouth.
COMBAT
Driven by its raging hunger, a flesh
jelly simply rolls over its foes, absorbing them into its body mass.
When facing a group, it usually
concentrates on engulfing
one target, then defends
itself by lashing out at
other opponents with its
fleshy pseudopods while
attempting to absorb
its meal.
Absorb (Ex):
A flesh jelly
feeds by absorbing other creatures into its
bulk. Any creature engulfed by
the monster must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 25) or be
absorbed into its mass and die. A successful save prevents
absorption that round. Each absorbed creature heals a flesh
jelly of 2d6 points of damage. A flesh jelly expels the
absorbed creature’s personal belongings from its body 1d3
rounds after absorption. Nothing short of a wish or similar
magic can restore a creature that has been absorbed.
Disease (Ex): Any creature engulfed by a flesh jelly or hit
by its slam attack must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 25)
or contract filth fever. The incubation period is 1d3 days,
and the disease deals 1d3 points of Dexterity damage and
1d3 points of Constitution damage (see Disease in Chapter 3
of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
Engulf (Ex): A flesh jelly can simply bowl over creatures
up to one size category smaller than itself as a standard
action. This attack affects as many opponents as the flesh
jelly’s body can cover. Each target can make either an attack
of opportunity against the flesh jelly or a Reflex save (DC
30) to avoid being engulfed. A successful saving throw indicates that the target has been pushed back or aside (target’s
choice) as the ooze moves forward. An engulfed creature is
considered grappled and trapped within the flesh jelly’s
body. A flesh jelly cannot make a slam attack during a round
in which it attempts to engulf, but each engulfed creature
takes automatic slam damage and must save against disease
(see above) on that round and every round thereafter that it
remains trapped. On any round after engulfing a creature,
the flesh jelly can attempt to absorb it.
Blindsight (Ex): A flesh jelly is blind, but its entire body
is a primitive sensory organ that can ascertain prey by scent
and vibration. This ability enables it to discern objects and
creatures within 60 feet. The flesh jelly usually does not
need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures
within range of its blindsight.
Horrid Stench (Ex): Any corporeal creature with 10 or
fewer Hit Dice that comes within 50 feet of a flesh
jelly must make a
Fortitude saving
throw (DC 25) or be
nauseated for the next
2d6 rounds. Another
save is required at the
end of that time if
the creature is still
within range. A single successful save
against this effect
renders the creature immune to
that flesh jelly’s
horrid stench for
24 hours. A nauseated creature cannot
attack, cast spells,
concentrate on spells,
or do anything else requiring attention. The only action permitted is a single move or move-equivalent action.
Ooze Traits: A flesh jelly is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing.
It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.
FLESH JELLYFOMORIAN
Huge Giant
Hit Dice: 15d8+90 (157 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 21 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +9 natural, +3 hide armor), touch 9,
flat-footed 20
Attacks: Gargantuan heavy flail +21/+16/+11 melee, or 2
slams +21 melee
Damage: Gargantuan heavy flail 2d8+18/19–20, slam 1d8+12
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 5 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Trample 2d10+18
Special Qualities: DR 5/–, fast healing 5, scent
Saves: Fort +15, Ref +6, Will +6
Abilities: Str 34, Dex 12, Con 22, Int 11, Wis 13, Cha 9
Skills: Listen +3, Move Silently +16, Spot +12
Feats: Alertness, Cleave, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any mountains and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or
gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually
neutral evil
Advancement: By
character class
Fomorians are grossly
deformed behemoths
that live in mountain caves,
abandoned mines, or other
subterranean areas. They rarely
modify their homes for comfort or convenience; they
simply adapt to their surroundings. Their territories are
commonly marked by the partially
consumed bodies of their victims.
Each fomorian has a different set of
physical deformities. These can include
a misplaced or misshapen limb, a misplaced facial feature, a hunchback, a
bulging body part, drooping
flesh, flapping ears, a
huge snout, large feet
on short legs, and
many others. Patches
of hair as tough as wire
are scattered over its pale white
skin, and large warts and other growths dot its thick hide.
Unlike other giants, fomorians can survive on relatively
little food, considering the size of their bodies. They eat
almost any organic matter they come across, from molds
and lichens to humanoid prey, which is their favorite.
A fomorian speaks Giant and one other language (usually
Common).
COMBAT
Fomorians usually try to sneak up on opponents and hit as
hard as they can. If they bother to keep captured opponents alive after combat, it is only for the entertainment
they gain from crude torture before eating their fallen
foes. Fomorians do not throw or catch rocks as other
giants do.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a fomorian can trample opponents at least one size
category smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d10+18 points
of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 29) for half damage.
Fast Healing (Ex): A
fomorian regains lost hit
points at the rate of 5 per
round. Fast healing does
not restore hit points lost
from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not allow the
fomorian to regrow or reattach lost
body parts.
Scent (Ex): A fomorian can
detect approaching enemies, sniff
out hidden foes, and track by sense
of smell.
Skills: A fomorian has a +10 racial
bonus on Move Silently checks.
FOMORIAN SOCIETY
Depravity and wickedness rule
fomorian society. The strongest
and cruelest rules over all the
others within reach, and
women and children are treated
as slaves in every household. Acts of
violence, sometimes resulting in permanent injury or death, are common
among fomorians. Anyone who can
completely dominate a fomorian can
use the creature as an ally, but such
an alliance lasts only as long
as the fomorian fears the
dominant being.
FOMORIAN
CHARACTERS
A fomorian’s favored class is barbarian. Gang leaders are
either druids or barbarian/druids.
A fomorian PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 17. Thus, a 1st-level fomorian barbarian has
an ECL of 18 and is the equivalent of a 18th-level character.
105
FOMORIAN106
FOREST SLOTH
Large Beast
Hit Dice: 14d10+70 (147 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 40 ft., brachiation 40 ft., climb 60 ft.
AC: 21 (–1 size, +5 Dex, +7 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 16
Attacks: 2 claws +16 melee and bite +11 melee
Damage: Claw 2d4+7, bite 2d8+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision,
poison immunity, scent
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +14, Will +5
Abilities: Str 25, Dex 20, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 9
Skills: Climb +15*, Listen +7, Move Silently, +8*, Spot +6*
Climate/Terrain: Warm forests
Organization: Solitary, pair, or family (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 15–21 HD (Large); 22–42 HD (Huge)
The territorial forest sloth is a nocturnal hunter that roams
tropical forests and jungles. This creature is not the slowmoving beast its name implies; in fact, it possesses lightning-fast reflexes and can travel as quickly over land as it
does through trees. It is particularly fond of halfling flesh.
Standing 8 feet tall, a forest sloth is a sinewy beast with a
large, toothy mouth. Its tremendous jaws support a row of
oversized, needle-sharp front teeth. Each of a forest sloth’s
limbs ends in three toes tipped with huge, curved claws. Its
fur color ranges from olive to brown.
Forest sloths communicate with each
other using screeches and grunts.
COMBAT
The forest sloth typically attacks by
leaping on prey with a frenzy of bite and
claw attacks. Families of forest sloths
often hunt together, using one as a scout
to lure prey into the trees where the rest of
the group waits in ambush.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a forest sloth
hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself with both claw attacks, it deals
normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +21). If it gets a hold, it transfers
the opponent to its mouth as a free action and
automatically hits with its bite attack in the
same round. It can then try to swallow its prey
in the next round. Alternatively, the forest sloth
has the option to conduct the grapple normally,
or simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the forest sloth is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A forest sloth can swallow a creature that is at least two size categories smaller than itself by
making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +21),
provided that the opponent is already in its mouth at the
start of its turn. Once inside the sloth, the opponent takes
2d4+7 points of bludgeoning damage plus 1d8 points of
acid damage per round from the sloth’s gullet. A successful
grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of
the gullet and return to the sloth’s mouth, where another
successful grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively,
a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with either
claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at least
25 points of damage to the gullet (AC 20) in this way creates
an opening large enough to permit escape. Once a single
swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole;
thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way
out. A Large forest sloth’s gullet can hold 2 Small, 8 Tiny, or
32 Diminutive or smaller creatures.
Scent (Ex): A forest sloth can detect
approaching enemies, sniff out hidden
foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: *A forest sloth receives a
+4 racial bonus on Climb, Move
Silently, and Spot checks when in
forested areas.
FOREST
SLOTHFROST SALAMANDER
Medium-Size Magical Beast (Cold)
Hit Dice: 12d10+12 (78 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
AC: 17 (+2 Dex, +5 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 4 claws +12 melee and bite +10 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6/19–20, bite 1d6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Cold aura
Special Qualities: Cold subtype, darkvision 60 ft., DR
15/+1, low-light vision
Saves: Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +5
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 7
Skills: Climb +8, Hide +14, Listen +3, Move Silently +13,
Spot +3
Feats: Alertness, Improved Critical (claw), Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Any cold and underground
Organization: Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 13–18 HD (Large); 19–24 HD (Huge);
25–36 HD (Gargantuan)
Frost salamanders can be found in many
extremely cold places on the Material
Plane. Ice caves, glaciers, frozen lakes,
and other places where the temperature seldom rises above freezing are
their favorite haunts.
A frost salamander’s ice-blue,
serpentine body has six legs,
a long tail, and a reptilian
head. Its claws are equipped
with talons that resemble
icicles. These claws not only
make vicious weapons, they
allow the creature to climb
any ice-covered surface—
even a vertical wall.
Frost salamanders are
omnivorous, but they prefer their food frozen. If
prey is plentiful, they may
keep particularly delectable items, such as yetis and
adventurers, frozen in their
lair for years until the right
craving strikes them.
COMBAT
In combat, a frost salamander
rears up on its two hind legs and
slashes with all four front legs while biting with its vicious
teeth. It might also try bull rushing an enemy backward into
a pool of freezing water.
Cold Aura (Ex): A frost salamander emanates such
intense cold that each creature within 20 feet takes 1d8
points of cold damage per round (no saving throw). Magical
effects that shield against cold work against this aura, but
normal measures (such as heavy furs or insulation) do not.
Cold Subtype (Ex): A frost salamander is immune to cold
damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature
takes half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
GALEB DUHR
Medium-Size Elemental (Earth)
Hit Dice: 8d8+40 (76 hp)
Initiative: –3
Speed: 10 ft., burrow 10 ft.
AC: 22 (–3 Dex, +15 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 22
Attacks: 2 slams +7 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: DR 15/+1, elemental traits, freeze, SR 21,
tremorsense
Saves: Fort +11, Ref –1,
Will +7
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 5,
Con 20, Int 11, Wis 16,
Cha 12
Skills: Concentration +12,
Diplomacy +3, Knowledge
(geography) +7, Perform +10
(ballad, chant, sing, storytelling, and five others),
Sense Motive +14
Feats: Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Any mountain
Organization: Solitary, pair, or
tumble (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: No coins; standard goods (gems
only); standard items (potions only)
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 9–15 HD (Mediumsize); 16–24 HD (Large)
Galeb duhrs are among the oddest creatures that an adventurer can encounter, but
they are seldom dangerous. They live only in the mountains and seldom, if ever, venture onto other terrain. It is
not known whether galeb duhrs can reproduce on the
107
FROST
SALAMANDER108
Material Plane, or whether the ones found there have all
come from the Elemental Plane of Earth.
To all appearances a galeb duhr is a living boulder with
two dark, brooding eyes, a mouth, and rough-hewn
appendages that serve as hands and feet. The typical galeb
duhr stands about 4 feet tall,
though advanced versions
can reach heights of up
to 16 feet.
When sitting perfectly still (an activity that occupies
much of its time), a galeb duhr is nearly indistinguishable
from the surrounding stone—so much so that many travelers walk right past one without realizing it. Galeb duhrs
do love to sing, however, and occasionally their deep, resonant, slow, and often palpably sad songs reveal their presence. The frequency of much of their singing falls below
the range of human hearing, but the subsonic tones can be
felt through the ground for many miles and tend to make
horses nervous.
As one might imagine, galeb duhrs are slow-moving,
slow to anger, slow to action, and always take the long view.
They have no known enemies except time. Now and then
reckless monsters or adventurers attack them, hoping to
acquire either gems or information about where to find
rich veins of gold or other precious ore. Such attempts are
generally doomed before they even begin. Galeb duhrs do
know all there is to know about their mountain homes,
both aboveground and below, but forcing them to give up
those details is difficult in the extreme.
To further complicate matters, galeb duhrs are quite territorial, even to the point of feeling protective about rocks and
boulders, in much the same way that a treant feels responsible for the forest in which it lives. Anyone damaging,
destroying, or even mining the mountains near a galeb
duhr’s home often discovers some very staunch opposition.
COMBAT
Galeb duhrs are usually solitary creatures, though they
occasionally live with a few of their own kind. When
approached, a galeb duhr can easily make it itself unnoticed. When irritated into combat, however, it attacks
with its slams.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—animate objects (stone
only), stone shape; 1/day—move earth, passwall, transmute
rock to mud, wall of stone. Caster level 20th; save DC 11 +
spell level.
Elemental Traits (Ex): A galeb duhr is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject
to critical hits or flanking, and it cannot be raised or
resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-
foot range).
Freeze (Ex): A galeb duhr can hold itself
so still that it appears to be a boulder. An
observer must succeed at a Spot check
(DC 30) to notice that it is really alive.
Tremorsense (Ex): A galeb duhr
can automatically sense the location of anything within 300 feet
that is in contact with the ground.
GAMBOL
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 8d10+16 (60 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 30 ft., climb 15 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +4 Dex, +5 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Bite +13 melee and 2 claws +11 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+6, claw 1d4+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear aura, great leap
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., evasion, haste, lowlight vision, masterful dodge
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +12, Will +3
Abilities: Str 23, Dex 18, Con 15, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 9
Skills: Balance +6, Climb +14, Jump +33, Tumble +14
Feats: Lightning Reflexes, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Warm forest
Organization: Solitary, pack (5–20) or troop (21–40)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: 9–12 HD (Large); 13–24 HD (Huge)
These carnivorous cousins of the ape are fiercely territorial
marauders. They obsessively prowl the jungle, attacking
anything that enters the area they claim.
GAMBOLA gambol is a baboonlike primate that stands 9 feet tall
and weighs more than 1,000 pounds. Its purple skin is covered with dense, silky, blue hair. A gambol has elongated
jaws and a hairless, doglike muzzle.
COMBAT
Gambols tumble into combat, clawing and biting their foes.
They take advantage of their reach to grapple and trip
advancing foes. Their constant maneuvering makes them
difficult targets for foes attacking from a distance.
Fear Aura (Su): When a gambol howls, every creature
within a 100-foot radius must succeed at a Will save (DC 13)
or become panicked for 1d6+1 rounds. Whether or not the
save is successful, the creature is then immune to that
gambol’s howl for 24 hours. The howl is a sonic, mind-affecting fear effect.
Great Leap (Ex): A gambol gains a +25 bonus on Jump
checks. Maximum distance restrictions do not apply to
its jumps.
Evasion (Ex): A gambol that makes a successful Reflex
saving throw against an effect that would normally deal half
damage instead avoids damage altogether.
Haste (Su): A gambol can take an extra partial action each
round. This ability is always active.
Masterful Dodge (Ex): As a free action once per
round, a gambol can dodge one ranged weapon attack,
one reach melee weapon attack, or one spell that requires
an attack roll by making a successful Reflex save (DC 20).
An attack using a weapon with an enhancement bonus
increases the save DC by the amount of the bonus, and a
spell adds its spell level to the save DC. To use this ability, the gambol must be aware of the attack and not be
flat-footed.
GIANT
Giants are humanoid-shaped beings of great size
with even greater strength. They accomplish
much through sheer determination and brute
force, and in fact most rely on their might to
solve problems. Giants can inflict tremendous damage on those who anger or
oppose them, but they can also put their
strength to good use in aiding their allies.
Many giants subsist by hunting or
taking what they want from smaller,
weaker beings. A few are not so cruel,
raising what crops and livestock they
need to survive.
All giants speak Giant. A giant with an
Intelligence score of at least 10 also
speaks Common.
COMBAT
Giants relish melee combat. They favor massive
weapons, especially two-handed ones, and wield them
with impressive skill. They possess enough cunning to
soften up a foe with ranged attacks before closing, if they
can. A giant’s favorite ranged weapon is a big rock.
Rock Throwing (Ex): An adult giant is an accomplished rock thrower, so he or she receives a +1 racial
bonus on attack rolls when throwing rocks. A giant of at
least Huge size can hurl rocks weighing 60 to 80 pounds
each (Medium-size objects) up to five range increments.
The size of the range increment varies with the giant’s
kind (see individual entries). A Colossal giant can hurl
rocks weighing 160 to 200 pounds (Huge objects).
Rock Catching (Ex): A giant of at least Huge size can
catch Small, Medium-size, Large, or Huge rocks (or projectiles of similar shape). A Colossal giant can catch rocks of up
to Colossal size. Once per round, a giant that would normally be hit by a rock can make a Reflex save to catch it as a
free action. The DC to catch a rock is based on the rock’s size
(see table below). If the projectile has a bonus on attack rolls
because of magic, the DC increases by that amount. The
giant must be ready for and aware of the attack.
Rock Size DC
Small 15
Medium-size 20
Large 25
Huge 30
Gargantuan 35
Colossal 40
GIANT SOCIETY
Solitary giants are usually young adults striking out on their
own. Gangs are usually made up of young adults who hunt
or raid (or both) together. Giant bands typically consist of
young adults and their mates, servants, or guards. About a
third of the giants in a band or tribe are children.
109
GIANT
AW110
Giant children can be formidable opponents in their own
right. When a group of giants includes children, roll d% for
each child to determine his or her maturity level: 01–25
infant (no combat ability); 26–50 juvenile (two size categories
smaller than an adult, 8 fewer Hit Dice, –8 to Strength and
Constitution scores, and 1 rank in each skill that an adult
has); 51–100 adolescent (one size category smaller than an
adult, 4 fewer Hit Dice, –4 to Strength and Constitution
scores, and 2, 3, or 4 ranks in each skill that an adult has).
Giant children can throw rocks if they meet the minimum
size requirement. Except as noted, giant children are identical with adults of the same kind.
FOREST GIANT
Forest giants are among the tallest specimens of giantkind,
and they can live to be up to 200 years old. They are powerful
hunters that pose a threat to all animals that dwell in the woods.
An adult forest giant stands 18 feet tall but weighs only
3,000 pounds. The lanky, muscular body resembles that of a
wood elf but appears much sturdier. The creature has deep,
earth-yellow skin and pale green hair that is usually wild
and unkempt. The typical clothing for either gender is made
of fur or leather, and each forest giant also wears some bone
jewelry, particularly necklaces and earrings.
A forest giant’s bag contains everything needed to survive in
the wilderness, including tools to make and repair weapons,
2d4 rocks, 1d4+4 mundane items, and the giant’s personal
wealth. These items tend to be parts of things it killed for food,
such as scraps of fur and hide, dried insects, and bones.
Combat
Forest giants target opponents from afar with their poisoned
arrows. Though they are not averse to attacking with their
clubs, their poison-tipped, ranged weapons often end a
battle quickly with few casualties for the giants. Forest
giants use their natural camouflage abilities to hide among
the trees and wait in ambush for the next creature that
crosses their path. Their thrown rocks have a range increment of 120 feet.
Poison (Ex): Forest giants coat their arrows with poison
(Fortitude save DC 22). The initial and secondary damage is
the same (unconsciousness for 4d4 rounds).
Skills: A forest giant has a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks. * In wooded areas, this bonus rises to +8.
Forest Giant Society
Forest giants live solely in wooded areas regardless of the
climate. These ravenous meat-eaters hunt nearly any kind
GIANT
Forest Giant Sun Giant
Huge Giant Huge Giant (Fire)
Hit Dice: 13d8+78 (136 hp) 13d8+91 (149 hp)
Initiative: +5 +2
Speed: 40 ft. 40 ft.
AC: 20 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +11 natural), 20 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +10 natural),
touch 9, flat-footed 19 touch 10, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Gargantuan greatclub +18/+13 melee, or Gargantuan Gargantuan longspear +20/+15 melee, or rock
mighty composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) +10 ranged
+8/+3 ranged, or rock +9 ranged
Damage: Gargantuan greatclub 2d8+16, Gargantuan Gargantuan longspear 2d8+19/×3, rock
mighty composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) 2d8+13
2d8+4/×3, rock 2d8+11
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Poisoned arrows, rock throwing Rock throwing, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., rock catching Darkvision 60 ft., fire subtype, rock catching
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +5, Will +7 Fort +15, Ref +6, Will +8
Abilities: Str 33, Dex 12, Con 22, Int 14, Wis 16, Cha 21 Str 37, Dex 14, Con 25, Int 15, Wis 18, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +5*, Listen +5, Sense Motive +6, Spot +7 Handle Animal +6, Hide +8*, Listen +8, Spot +7
Feats: Improved Initiative, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot Alertness, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot
Climate/Terrain: Any forest Warm and temperate deserts
Organization: Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), band (6–9 plus 35% Solitary, pair, gang (3–5), or family (3–8 plus
noncombatants plus 1 1st–2nd level druid), 1–4 noncombatants plus 1 4th–6th level
or hunting/raiding party (6–9 plus 35% adept, cleric, or sorcerer)
noncombatants plus 1 3rd–5th level druid)
Challenge Rating: 11 12
Treasure: Standard coins; double goods; standard items Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class By character classof animal or beast for its flesh. Forest giants maintain
friendly relations with fey, and they cooperate with other
primitive woodland beings who enjoy the same hunting
lifestyle as they do.
Forest Giant Characters
A forest giant’s favored class is ranger. Many groups of forest
giants include both druids and rangers.
A forest giant PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal
to its class level + 16. Thus, a 1st-level forest giant ranger has
an ECL of 17 and is the equivalent of a 17th-level character.
SUN GIANT
Sun giants are cruel nomads who eke out a living raising
livestock under the bleakest of conditions. Most are grim
and brutal, caring little for the trappings of civilization. Despite their harsh existence, they are long-lived beings, often
reaching 400 years or more in age.
A sun giant’s skin is parched and wrinkled from years of
living in harsh, desertlike conditions. Hair that is soft and
black in childhood becomes dry, ashen, and brittle with
the passing of time. Only the creature’s eyes seem unaffected by the desert—they sparkle a bright blue color.
The typical sun giant stands 16 feet tall and weighs 7,000
pounds. The usual garb for either gender is a loose, lightcolored robe that covers the legs, body, and arms, plus a
cloth burnoose looped around the head and face to protect
the skin from the burning sun. A sun giant never wears
shoes, either for walking or riding.
A sun giant’s bag contains 1d2 rocks, 1d6+4 mundane
items, and the giant’s personal wealth. Personal possessions usually include simple things such as sand
sculptures, coins, and prized gifts from esteemed sun
giant leaders.
Combat
Sun giants use their natural camouflage ability to hide amid
the sand dunes, where they lie in wait for enemies with
spears at the ready. They rarely throw rocks, but when they
do, the range increment is 120 feet. In melee, sun giants
prefer to pound opponents with their fists. During times of
war, they fight mounted, seated upon Gargantuan steeds
that they raise and train themselves. When weaponless, a sun
giant uses its spell-like abilities
to keep foes at bay.
Spell-Like Abilities: At
will—spike stones, stone shape, wall
of stone. Caster level 13th; save
DC 12 + spell level.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A
sun giant is immune to fire
d a m a g e
b u t
takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for
half damage is allowed. In that case, the giant takes half
damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Skills: A sun giant has a +4 racial bonus on Hide checks.
*In desert areas, this bonus rises to +8.
Sun Giant Society
Sun giants dwell in the desert, but they never set up permanent homes there because they enjoy the freedom that comes
with living in tents. They almost always ride rather than traveling on foot. They prefer living mounts such as rocs and
giant lizards, but when such creatures are scarce, they are
quite willing to have their clerics animate dead mounts.
As herders, sun giants see all land as theirs for the taking,
so they graze their animals anywhere food is available. This
destructive practice often strips fields bare and turns the
land barren, earning sun giants few friends in the desert.
Sun Giant Characters
Most groups of sun giants include clerics with access to any
two of the following domains: Destruction, Fire, Sun, Travel,
and War. A sun giant’s favored class is ranger.
A sun giant PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 16. Thus, a 1st-level sun giant ranger has an
ECL of 17 and is the equivalent of a 17th-level character.
OCEAN GIANT
The noble ocean giants are deep-sea dwellers who delight
in the tossing waves and the rich life of the underwater
world. These usually peaceful creatures are nevertheless
quick to anger
when anyone
finds fault with
their ways. Ocean
giants frequently
live to be 600
years old.
The barrelchested body of
an ocean giant
is powerfully
built, and the
face has an almost leonine
quality. Coppery
skin is complemented by flowing white hair
that streams out
in waves as the
giant swims. In
natural form, an
ocean giant has
a fishlike tail like
that of a merfolk,
111
GIANT112
though the landform ability (see below) provides an alternate form in which the tail is replaced by legs. An ocean
giant of either gender measures 16 feet in length and weighs
more than 4,000 pounds. On land, the typical ocean giant
wears light clothing that is unlikely to impede swimming
should that become necessary. Underwater, clothing is
spurned except for a belt pouch to carry personal effects.
An ocean giant’s bag contains 1d2 rocks, 1d6+4 mundane
items, and the giant’s personal wealth. These items tend to
be sea-related items such as navigation instruments, sea
shells, pearls, and treasure found on sunken ships.
Combat
Whether fighting on the surface or underwater, an ocean
giant usually wields a massive trident. On land, ocean giants
prefer to keep their foes at a distance. They hurl rocks (range
increment 120 feet) at closing enemies and even ships that
are not welcome in their territory. In close combat on land,
or when unarmed, they hammer opponents with their fists
and slap with their tails.
Amphibious (Ex): Although ocean giants have gills for
breathing underwater, they can also breathe air and can survive indefinitely on land.
Blunt Weapon Immunity (Ex): An ocean giant takes no
damage from bludgeoning weapons.
Cold Subtype (Ex): An ocean giant is immune to cold
damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the giant takes
half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Landform (Su): This ability allows an ocean giant to
assume the form of a Huge humanoid-shaped giant or return
to its natural form at will. An ocean giant in landform is able
to walk on land, but it has no tail attack. A change wrought by
landform cannot be dispelled, nor does the ocean giant revert
to its natural form when killed. A true seeing spell, however,
reveals the ocean giant’s natural shape if it is in landform.
Ocean Giant Society
Ocean giants live in magnificent, underwater mansions situated near barrier reefs. They live off the sea, hunting large sea
creatures and harvesting aquatic plants and shellfish. Elderly
ocean giants often raise domestic animals on deserted islands
GIANT
Ocean Giant Mountain Giant
Huge Giant (Cold, Aquatic) Colossal Giant (Earth)
Hit Dice: 18d8+162 (243 hp) 30d8+390 (525 hp)
Initiative: +6 +0
Speed: 40 ft., swim 80 ft. 80 ft.
AC: 26 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +16 natural), 31 (–8 size, +29 natural),
touch 10, flat-footed 24 touch 2, flat-footed 31
Attacks: Gargantuan trident +25/+20/+15 melee and tail Mountain giant club +30/+25/+20/+15 melee,
slap +20 melee, or 2 slams +25 melee and tail slap or 2 slams +30 melee, or rock +15 ranged
+20 melee, or rock +14 ranged
Damage: Gargantuan trident 4d6+21, slam 1d6+14, Mountain giant club 4d8+24/19–20, slam
tail slap 1d10+7, rock 2d8+14 2d6+16, rock 4d8+16
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft. 40 ft. by 40 ft./25 ft.
Special Attacks: Rock throwing Crush 2d6+24, fling, grapple, rock throwing,
trample 4d6+24
Special Qualities: Amphibious, blunt weapon immunity, cold subtype, Darkvision 60 ft., rock catching, scent,
darkvision 60 ft., landform, rock catching summon giants
Saves: Fort +20, Ref +8, Will +8 Fort +30, Ref +10, Will +10
Abilities: Str 39, Dex 15, Con 28, Int 11, Wis 14, Cha 18 Str 43, Dex 10, Con 37, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 7
Skills: Diplomacy +6, Listen+8, Sense Motive +8, Spot +10, Jump +18, Listen +16, Spot +16
Swim +22
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Far Shot, Improved Initiative, Alertness, Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Great
Point Blank Shot Cleave, Improved Critical (mountain giant
club), Power Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic Any mountains
Organization: Solitary, pair, or family (3–8 plus 1–4 noncombatants Solitary or family (2 plus 1–3 noncombatants)
plus 1 7th–10th level cleric or sorcerer and 2–8
sea lions)
Challenge Rating: 19 26
Treasure: Double standard Standard
Alignment: Usually good Usually chaotic
Advancement: By character class By character classto supplement their clans’ diet. Many young ocean giants
desire to travel the seas aboard sailing ships, so they sign up
to become sailors. Of course, their incredible size limits
them to only the largest vessels. Merfolk and aquatic storm
giants view ocean giants as plunderers of the sea’s wealth, so
relations between them are strained at best.
Ocean Giant Characters
An ocean giant’s favored class is sorcerer, but
many also choose to become clerics. An ocean
giant cleric can choose two of the following
domains: Luck, Protection, and Water.
An ocean giant PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 23; thus, a 1stlevel ocean giant sorcerer has an ECL of 24 and
is the equivalent of a 24th-level character.
MOUNTAIN GIANT
Among the largest giants in existence, mountain giants are primitive creatures given to
cruelty and capriciousness. They take great
pleasure in flinging boulders down upon
passing smaller creatures, trying to hit
them as they flee. Mountain giants often live
to be 100 years old.
A mountain giant resembles a titanic hill giant, standing
more than 40 feet tall and weighing nearly 50,000 pounds.
Greasy, jet-black hair frames a face with bulbous features
and a skin tone that can be any shade from tan to reddish
brown. The typical mountain giant wears only minimal
clothing—usually a breechcloth and a shirt made of
rough animal hide that barely covers a large
pot belly.
A mountain giant’s bag contains 3d4 rocks,
1d4+2 mundane items, and the giant’s personal
wealth. These items tend to be humanoid
artifacts that the mountain giant considers playthings, such as broken
wagons, small huts, and furniture,
including tables and beds.
Combat
Mountain giants attack in a straightforward manner, stepping forth to
overrun opponents whenever possible. They also enjoy picking up foes
and hurling them against a mountainside. Many an armed foe has
foiled a mountain giant’s initial
grab attempt only to be scooped up
by the monster’s other hand.
In melee, mountain giants use their
height to smash their clubs down on the heads
of their foes. A mountain giant that feels seriously threatened often uses its summon giants ability to engage its foes
with other opponents, then steps back to hurl boulders.
Against groups of smaller foes, mountain giants prefer
their trample or crush attacks.
Crush (Ex): A mountain giant that jumps at least
20 feet into the air (or jumps down from a height of at
least 20 feet) can land on opponents two or more
size categories smaller than itself as a
standard action, using its whole
body to crush them. A crush
attack affects as many creatures as
can fit under the giant’s body.
(This is normally a 40-foot
square, but the giant can instead
opt to come down on its seat and
cover a 40-foot by 60-foot area.) Each
creature in the affected area
must succeed at a Reflex
save (DC 38) or be pinned,
automatically taking 2d6+24
points of bludgeoning damage.
Thereafter, if the giant chooses
to maintain the pin, treat it as a
normal grapple attack. While
pinned, the opponent takes
crush damage each round.
Fling (Ex): A mountain giant that sucessfully grapples a foe
two or more size categories smaller than itself can hurl the
creature as a standard action. A flung creature travels up to 120
feet and takes 12d6 points of damage. A creature that is flung
off a mountain takes this amount of damage or the appropriate
falling damage, whichever is greater. The giant also can throw
the flung creature as though it were a boulder. In this case,
the flung creature takes 12d6+16 points of damage, and any
opponent it strikes takes 4d8+16 points of damage.
Grapple (Ex): If a mountain giant hits
an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a slam
(used as a melee touch attack), it
deals normal damage and attempts to
start a grapple (grapple bonus +54). If it
gets a hold, it can fling the opponent in
the next round. Alternatively, the mountain giant has the option to conduct
the grapple normally, or simply use
one hand to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the
mountain giant is not considered
grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action
during its turn each round, a mountain
giant can trample opponents at least
one size category smaller than itself. This attack
113
GIANT114
deals 4d6+24 points of bludgeoning damage. A trampled
opponent can attempt either an attack of opportunity at a –4
penalty or a Reflex save (DC 41) for half damage.
Scent (Ex): A mountain giant can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Summon Giants (Sp): Once per day, a mountain giant can
attempt to summon 1d8+1 ogres, 1d6+1 trolls, or 1d4+1 hill
giants with a 25% chance of success.
Skills and Feats: A mountain giant has EHD as though it
were a Huge creature.
Mountain Giant Society
Mountain giants live largely solitary lives in desolate mountain ranges and volcanic peaks. Though most of them resent
intruders, some like to keep a few dwarves and humans as
pets. When more than one mountain giant is encountered,
it is usually a mated pair with children.
Mountain Giant Characters
A mountain giant’s favored class is barbarian, though the
cleric class is also popular among the race. Mountain giant
clerics can choose any two of the following domains: Earth,
Strength, and Trickery.
A mountain giant PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 25. Thus, a 1st-level
mountain giant barbarian has an ECL of 26 and is
the equivalent of a 26th-level character.
GLIMMERSKIN
Medium-Size Outsider (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 12d8+24 (78 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: Fly 50 ft. (perfect)
AC: 14 (+1 Dex, +3 deflection), touch
14, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Energy touch +13
Damage: Energy touch
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Energy touch
Special Qualities: DR 5/+1, heroic bond, incorporeal
subtype, outsider traits, plane shift, SR 15, telepathy
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +9, Will +10
Abilities: Str —, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 11, Wis 15, Cha 16
Skills: Bluff +17, Diplomacy +16, Intimidate +5,
Knowledge (arcana) +14, Knowledge (the planes)
+14, Search +15, Sense Motive +17, Spot +17
Feats: Cleave, Great Cleave, Power Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 8
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
Glimmerskins are thrill-seeking parasites from the Positive
Energy Plane. These creatures travel to the Material Plane
solely to engage in mortal combat.
Since a glimmerskin lacks a material form, it cannot
engage an opponent in physical melee unaided. To circumvent this difficulty, it solicits a willing host to harbor it. In
exchange for this service, the glimmerskin temporarily
grants the host augmented fighting skills and abilities.
A glimmerskin appears as a vaguely humanoid-shaped
being made of pulsing white light. Despite its alien appearance, it possesses a recognizably intelligent, elflike face.
When bonded with a host, a glimmerskin cosmetically
alters its shape to one more appropriate for battle, usually
appearing as a full suit of radiant armor or a glowing, hooded
robe. A glimmerskin envelops only its host’s body; it cannot
cover the latter’s shield or drawn weapons.
When on the Material Plane, glimmerskins usually seek
out large-scale battles, since these offer a greater variety of
potential hosts. The creature is not concerned with alignment, nor is it interested in its host’s intentions, nor does it
care whether its host lives or dies—it desires only combat.
A glimmerskin can remain away from the Positive Energy Plane for a number of hours equal
to half its Constitution score. Each round that
it exceeds this limit, it must make a Fortitude
save (DC 20) or die from energy dispersion.
This danger keeps most glimmerskins
from making frequent trips to the
Material Plane.
Some enterprising adventurers who are
familiar with the planes and aware of the
glimmerskins’ limited time frames arrange
one-time “bondings” between glimmerskins and willing hosts. This often occurs
during times of war and similar unrest, but
bondings also occur between glimmerskins
and adventurers seeking some extra power for
an upcoming confrontation. Whoever arranges
such a bonding first determines what physical
challenges the host expects to meet, then apprises
the glimmerskin of the offer and selects a time and
place for the bonding. The host usually pays the
arranger a stipend (or “finder’s fee”)
ahead of time for this service.
Combat
Glimmerskins revel in combat, but
they cannot actually control their
hosts. Instead, they communicate their wishes telepathically, acting as combat advisors. A host who ignores a glimmerskin’s requests risks termination of the bond, since the
monster is quite willing to abandon a host in favor of a
more accommodating or interesting one. Before abandoning a host, a glimmerskin usually contacts its next prospect
via telepathy to arrange a transfer. If badly wounded, a
GLIMMERSKINglimmerskin escapes to the Positive Energy Plane rather
than continuing to fight.
Energy Touch (Su): The positively energized touch of a
glimmerskin heals a target of 5 points of damage per round
or grants 5 additional temporary hit points per round to a
creature already at full hit points. These temporary hit
points fade 1d6 rounds after the creature ceases physical
contact with the glimmerskin. However, this benefit has an
unfortunate side effect. For each round that its hit points
(including temporary ones) exceed its normal hit point
total, the target creature must make a successful Fortitude
save (DC 19) or explode in a 20-foot burst of radiant energy.
Each creature caught in the blast (including the target) takes
damage equal to 2d6 points + the number of excess hit
points the target had at the time. A Reflex save (DC 19)
reduces the damage by half. A glimmerskin’s host automatically benefits from the additional hit points but is allowed
no saving throw to reduce the damage from the blast. Glimmerskins rarely inform their hosts of this side effect.
Heroic Bond (Su): A glimmerskin bonds by enveloping
its host. A bonded host gains a +4 bonus on melee attack
rolls, a +2 armor bonus to AC, access to the glimmerskin’s
feats (with the prerequisite Strength score of at least 13),
and any class features the glimmerskin may have. Additionally, a host who can turn undead gains a +5 bonus on the roll
to determine Hit Dice affected. In exchange, the host shares
half of any earned experience points with the glimmerskin.
Spells that protect against Positive Energy Plane effects prevent a glimmerskin from bonding to a host.
Incorporeal Subtype: A glimmerskin can be harmed
only by other incorporeal creatures, +1 or better magic
weapons, spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. The creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage
from a corporeal source, except for force effects or attacks
made with ghost touch weapons. A glimmerskin can pass
through solid objects, but not force effects, at will. Its
attacks ignore natural armor, armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and force effects work normally against them.
A glimmerskin always moves silently and cannot be heard
with Listen checks if it doesn’t wish to be.
Outsider Traits: A glimmerskin has darkvision (60-foot
range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Plane Shift (Sp): A glimmerskin can use plane shift at will
(caster level 12th; Will save DC 18).
Telepathy (Su): A glimmerskin can communicate telepathically with any creature within 100 feet that has a language.
Feats: A glimmerskin’s feats become usable only when
the creature is bonded with a host who has a Strength score
of at least 13.
GLIMMERSKIN CHARACTERS
A glimmerskin’s favored class is fighter.
A glimmerskin PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal
to its class level + 15. Thus, a 1st-level glimmerskin fighter has
an ECL of 16 and is the equivalent of a 16th-level character.
GOLEM
Golems are magically created constructs of great power.
Constructing one involves the use of mighty magic and elemental forces. The animating force for a golem is a spirit
from the Elemental Plane of Earth. The process of creation
binds the unwilling spirit to the artificial body and subjects
it to the will of the golem’s creator.
Golems have no language of their own, but they can
understand simple instructions from their creators.
COMBAT
Golems are tenacious in combat. Since they are mindless,
they can do nothing in the absence of orders from their creators. They always follow instructions explicitly and are
incapable of any strategy or tactics. They are emotionless in
combat and cannot be provoked.
If a golem’s creator is within 60 feet of it and both visible
and audible to it, he or she can command the creature directly.
An uncommanded golem usually follows its last instruction
to the best of its ability, though it returns any attacks made
against it. The creator can give the golem a simple program
(such as “Remain in an area and attack all creatures [or creatures of a specific type] that enter,” or “Ring a gong and
attack,” or the like) to govern its actions in his or her absence.
Since golems do not need to breathe and are immune to
most forms of energy, they can press an attack against an
opponent almost anywhere, from the bottom of the sea to
the frigid top of the tallest mountain.
Construct Traits: A golem is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects,
necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a Fortitude
save unless it also works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. It cannot
heal itself but can be healed through repair. It cannot be
raised or resurrected. A golem has darkvision (60-foot range).
Magic Immunity (Ex): Golems completely resist most
magical and supernatural effects, except as noted below.
CONSTRUCTION
The cost given for each golem includes the price of the
physical body, plus all the materials and spell components
that are consumed during the process or become a permanent part of the golem.
The first task is carving or assembling the golem’s physical body. The creator can do this personally or hire someone
else to do the job. The builder must have the requisite skill,
which varies with the golem. The real work of creation
involves extended magical rituals requiring two months to
complete. Understanding the rituals requires a character of
the appropriate level with the Craft Magic Arms and Armor
and Craft Wondrous Item feats. The creator must labor for at
least 8 hours each day in a specially prepared laboratory or
workroom. This chamber is similar to an alchemist’s laboratory and costs 500 gp to establish.
115
GOLEM116
When not working on the rituals, the creator must rest
and can perform no other activities except eating, sleeping,
or talking. If personally constructing the golem’s body, the
creator can perform the building and the rituals together.
Missing a day of rituals means the process fails and must be
started again. Any money spent is lost, but XP are not. The
golem’s body can be reused, as can the laboratory.
Completing the ritual drains the appropriate XP from the
creator and requires casting any spells on the final day. The
creator must cast the spells personally, but they can come
from outside sources, such as scrolls.
STAINED GLASS GOLEM
Beautiful stained glass windows not only indicate the
wealth of a temple or stronghold, they may also be the site’s
guardians. These beautiful constructs are built to harmonize
with a structure’s decor so that their presence is not obvious
to any except intruders.
Stained glass golems are flat, two-dimensional replicas
of living beings. When they move, they produce a tinkling
sound like that made by delicate crystal wind chimes.
When moving through a lighted area, they flash and
flicker as the light striking them breaks down into its
component hues. Stained glass golems never communicate in any way.
Combat
Stained glass golems attack by slashing with their “arms,”
which are as sharp as broken glass.
Keen (Su): A stained glass golem’s rake attack threatens a
critical hit on a natural attack roll of 19–20.
Magic Immunity (Ex): A stained glass golem is immune
to all spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects,
except as follows. A shatter spell affects it normally. A mending spell heals 2d6 points of damage the golem has taken.
Sonic attacks affect it normally.
Skills: *A stained glass golem receives a +20 competence
bonus on Hide checks when standing motionless in a
window frame.
Construction
A stained glass golem’s body is constructed from 50
pounds of glass shards and costs 10,000 gp to create.
Assembling the body requires a successful Craft (glassmaking) check (DC 25).
The creator must be 16th level and able to cast arcane
spells. Completing the ritual drains 200 XP from the creator
and requires the geas/quest, limited wish, and polymorph any
object spells.
GOLEM
Stained Glass Golem Brass Golem Dragonflesh Golem
Medium-Size Construct Large Construct Large Construct
Hit Dice: 12d10 (66 hp) 16d10 (88 hp) 30d10 (165 hp)
Initiative: +0 +0 +0
Speed: 30 ft. (can’t run) 30 ft. (can’t run) 40 ft. (can’t run), fly 120 ft. (poor)
AC: 15 (+5 natural), touch 10, 31 (–1 size, +22 natural), 23 (–1 size, +14 natural),
flat-footed 15 touch 9, flat-footed 31 touch 9, flat-footed 23
Attacks: 2 rakes +10 melee Huge +3 wounding greataxe Bite +27 melee and 2 claws +22
+19/+14/+9 melee, or butt +16 melee and 2 wings +22 melee
melee and tail slap +22 melee
Damage: Rake 1d8+1/19–20 Huge +3 wounding greataxe Bite 2d6+6, claw 1d8+3,
2d8+10/×3, butt 1d8+7 wing 1d6+3, tail slap 1d8+9
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: — Maze Frightful presence
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 10/+2, Construct traits, DR 15/+3, Blindsight 150 ft., construct
fast healing 5, keen, magic magic immunity, scent traits, DR 15/+3, magic
immunity immunity
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +5 Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +7 Fort +10, Ref +10, Will +13
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 10, Con —, Str 20, Dex 11, Con —, Str 22, Dex 11, Con —,
Int 4, Wis 13, Cha 7 Int 3, Wis 14, Cha 7 Int 4, Wis 17, Cha 17
Skills: Hide +0* Wilderness Lore +2* —
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or crew (3–5) Solitary Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5 10 13
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 13–24 HD (Medium-size); 17–32 HD (Large); 31–60 HD (Large);
25–36 HD (Large) 33–48 HD (Huge) 61–90 HD (Huge)BRASS GOLEM
A brass golem exists to fulfill one goal, set at the time of its
creation. It waits with absolute patience until activated,
then it becomes a terrible instrument of destruction. If its
goal becomes unattainable—for example, if it was created
to guard a temple that no longer exists—the brass golem
loses its enchantment entirely and becomes nothing more
than a statue.
A brass golem is most often forged to resemble a minotaur. Until activated, it appears as a large, brass statue armed
with a gleaming greataxe.
Combat
A brass golem fights primarily with its greataxe.
Maze (Sp): Once per day, a brass golem can target a maze
effect (caster level 16th) against a single quarry. The golem
is immune to the effects of its own maze ability and that of
others of its kind, and it can freely enter its own maze to
track a target.
Magic Immunity (Ex): A brass golem is immune to all
spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects, except as
follows. An electricity effect slows it (as the slow spell) for 3
rounds, with no saving throw. A fire effect breaks any slow
effect on the golem and cures 1 point of damage for each 3
points of damage it would otherwise deal. (For example, a
brass golem hit by a fireball cast by a 5th-level wizard gains
back 6 hit points if the damage total is 18.) The golem does
not get a saving throw against fire effects.
Skills: *A brass golem is a relentless tracker. It gains a +20
competence bonus on Wilderness Lore checks for the purpose of tracking a foe designated by its creator, or in connection with any other goal set by its creator. When tracking a foe through its own maze, the creature gains a +20
insight bonus on Wilderness Lore checks.
Construction
A brass golem’s body is constructed from 1,000 pounds of
brass and costs 200,000 gp to create. (This amount includes
1,500 gp for the body and 32,320 gp
for the +3 wounding greataxe.)
Assembling the body requires
one successful Craft
( a r m o r s m i t h i n g )
check (DC 25) and
one successful Craft
(weaponsmithing)
check (DC 25).
The creator must
be 16th level and able
to cast arcane spells.
Completing the ritual drains 4,000 XP
from the creator and
requires the geas/
quest, limited wish,
maze, Mordenkainen’s
sword, and polymorph any object spells.
DRAGONFLESH GOLEM
Dragonflesh golems, sometimes called drolems, are built
from parts of dragons. These creatures can remember more
complex commands than most golems can, but because they
cannot think, they obey commands to the letter rather than
evaluating the intent. Drolems have been known to kill
their creators because a complex or incautiously worded
command allowed such an option for fulfillment.
True dragons hate dragonflesh golems and attack them on
sight. Once a dragon has slain a drolem, it hunts down the
creator as well, to exact retribution for the atrocities committed against dragonkind in creating such a creature.
The dragonflesh golem is a hideous patchwork of rotting,
mismatched dragon parts rudely stitched together. Despite its
appearance, a dragonflesh golem is a construct, not an undead.
Combat
A drolem lacks the breath weapons and the spellcasting abilities of true dragons. It usually prefers to land in the midst of
a group of opponents and lash out in all directions with its
teeth, claws, wings, and tail.
Frightful Presence (Ex): When a drolem charges,
attacks, or flies overhead, it inspires terror in all creatures
within 30 feet that have fewer Hit Dice or levels than it has.
Each potentially affected opponent must succeed at a Will
save (DC 28) or become shaken for 5d6 rounds. A successful
save leaves that opponent immune to that drolem’s frightful
presence for 24 hours.
Blindsight (Ex): A drolem can ascertain its surroundings
by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and scent, but also by
noticing vibrations and other environmental clues). This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 150 feet.
117
GOLEM118
The drolem usually does not need to make Spot or Listen
checks to notice creatures within range of its blindsight.
Magic Immunity (Ex): A drolem is immune to all spells,
spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects, except as follows.
Fire- and cold-based effects slow the monster (as the slow spell)
for 2d6 rounds, with no saving throw. An electricity effect
breaks any slow effect on the drolem and cures 1 point of
damage for each 3 points of damage it would otherwise deal.
For example, a drolem hit by a lightning bolt cast by a 5th-level
wizard gains back 6 hit points if the damage total is 18. The
drolem does not get a saving throw against electricity effects.
Construction
A drolem’s body is constructed from either an entire dragon
corpse, or enough parts of dragon corpses to assemble a
whole dragon.
The drolem costs 200,000 gp to create. Assembling the
body requires one successful Knowledge (nature) check and
one successful Heal check (both DC 25).
The creator must be 16th level and able to cast arcane
spells. Completing the ritual drains 4,000 XP from the creator and requires the geas/quest, limited wish, and polymorph
any object spells.
GRAVECRAWLER
Small Undead (Earth)
Hit Dice: 25d12 (162 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 20 ft., burrow 20 ft.
AC: 17 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Bite +13
Damage: Bite 1d4/19–20 plus 1d4 Constitution drain
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Calcifying aura, Constitution drain
Special Qualities: Burrow, speak with dead, SR 30,
tremorsense, turn resistance +6, undead traits
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +16
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 15, Con —, Int 16, Wis 11, Cha 11
Skills: Balance +4, Bluff +5, Diplomacy +12, Escape
Artist +10, Hide +21, Intimidate +2, Jump +2,
Knowledge (history) +20, Knowledge (local)
+20, Knowledge (undead) +20, Listen +7,
Sense Motive +5, Spot +2, Tumble +7
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat
Reflexes, Dodge, Improved Critical (bite),
Iron Will, Mobility, Skill Focus
(Knowledge [history]), Skill Focus
(Knowledge [local]), Skill Focus
(Knowledge [undead])
Climate/Terrain: Any land and
underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang
(3–4)
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 26–52 HD (Medium-size)
The gravecrawler, sometimes called the ancestor worm, is
an intelligent, sluglike undead with the power to turn flesh
(dead or living) to stone. Gravecrawlers can be found in
wilderness areas, but they are most often found in cemeteries, boneyards, and necropoli. There they slowly turn the
surrounding dead bodies to a brittle stone that cannot be
animated even by the animate dead spell.
A gravecralwer resembles a bloated, pale, segmented
worm about 3 feet in length. Its face looks like that of a
human or humanoid, except that it has no eyes—not even
vestigial ones.
Gravecrawlers can communicate with the spirits of the
dead they consume, and as such they often become repositories of local lore, history, and gossip. Because of this fact,
some societies view gravecrawlers as beneficial creatures.
Even those who consider them benefactors, however, tend
to give their lairs a wide berth, since the presence of these
creatures has a grievous effects on the living. Gravecrawlers
are frequently sought out by those who seek hidden knowledge and lost bits of history, but they are hated both by
necromancers and by corpse-devouring creatures such as
the ghoul and the corpse gatherer.
COMBAT
Gravecrawlers would rather be venerated than fought. If seriously threatened, they usually try to flee below ground. Occasionally, a gravecrawler may try
to ambush
GRAVECRAWLERits opponents, erupting from the ground to expose a whole
group of intruders to its calcifying aura, then following up
with its debilitating bite. Gravecrawlers tend to be more forgiving if propitiated with fresh bodies and uncalcified bones.
Calcifying Aura (Su): The presence of a gravecrawler is
enough to cause flesh (living or dead) to harden and calcify,
turning slowly into stone. This effect is a 30-foot-radius emanation centered on the gravecrawler, and it is always active. Every
creature within the area must make a Fortitude save (DC 22)
each round or take 1d2 points of Constitution damage. (Unlike
the drain from its bite, the loss from the gravecrawler’s calcifying aura is restored at the rate of 1 point per day.) A character
brought to a Constitution score of 0 in this manner turns completely to stone. A gravecrawler is immune to its own calcifying aura and to those of others of its kind.
Constitution Drain (Su): Any creature bitten by a gravecrawler must make a Fortitude save (DC 22) or permanently
lose 1d4 points of Constitution (or twice that amount on a
critical hit). The gravecrawler heals 5 points of damage (10
on a critical hit) whenever it drains Constitution, gaining
any excess as temporary hit points. A creature affected by
this Constitution drain finds parts of its flesh turned to
hard, brittle stone. At 0 Constitution, the target becomes a
stone statue. A gravecrawler is immune to its own Constitution drain and to those of others of its kind.
Burrow (Ex): Gravecrawlers can move through stone,
dirt, and earth, leaving no indication of their passage. A move
earth spell cast on an area containing a burrowing gravecrawler flings the creature back 30 feet and stuns it for 1
round, unless it succeeds at a Fortitude save (DC 22).
Speak with Dead (Su): At will, a gravecrawler can produce
an effect like that of a speak with dead spell (caster level 20th),
except that it can be used to communicate with only
one corpse per week. This ability does not allow
communication with calcified remains.
Tremorsense (Ex): A gravecrawler can
automatically sense the location of anything
within 60 feet that is in contact with the
ground.
Turn Resistance (Ex): A gravecrawler is treated as an undead with 31
Hit Dice for the purpose of turn, rebuke,
command, and bolster attempts.
Undead Traits: A gravecrawler is immune
to mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep,
paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromantic effects, and any
effect that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects. It is not
subject to critical hits, subdual damage,
ability damage, ability drain, energy drain,
or death from massive damage. A gravecrawler cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature has darkvision
(60-foot range).
GRAVORG
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+30 (85 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 13 (–1 size, –1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 2 claws +13 melee and bite +8 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+4, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Reverse gravity
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 5/+1, low-light
vision, SR 19
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +4
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 8, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +16, Hide +9*, Listen +5, Spot +5
Feats: Ability Focus (reverse gravity), Alertness, Improved
Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 8
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–20 HD (Huge);
21–25 HD (Gargantuan); 26–30 HD (Colossal)
A gravorg is a carnivorous predator that lairs underground.
These monsters are only rarely encountered in the wilderness; they tend to move from cave to cave or dungeon to dungeon in search of prey. The sound of armor and flesh repeatedly striking stone often means that a gravorg has found
another victim. The beast is so voracious that
the remnants of such an encounter
may be nothing more
than piles of bones and
equipment strewn
haphazardly over
a dungeon
f l o o r .
119
GRAVORG
RGM120
A gravorg is a 10-foot-long, four-legged animal that
vaguely resembles a sloth. Its fur is a mixture of white, gray,
and black hairs. This coloration makes it look like a lump of
stone when motionless.
COMBAT
A gravorg uses reverse gravity to bounce its prey off ceilings
or other overhangs, then dismisses the effect to drop the
opponents back to the floor. Only when its victims appear
unconscious or dead does a gravorg come out of hiding and
begin to feed.
A gravorg caught outdoors uses its reverse gravity ability to
throw predators in the air repeatedly until the latter either
flee or become disabled. The monster uses its claws and
teeth almost entirely for tearing open its prey rather than
for self-defense.
Reverse Gravity (Sp): At will, a gravorg can produce
an effect like that of a reverse gravity spell (caster
level 10th; Reflex save DC 18), except that the
range is 200 feet and it affects an area of up
to five 10-foot cubes. The monster simply
stacks the cubes to reach a ceiling or
other overhang, then uses any
remaining area to disrupt the prey’s
companions.
Skills: *A gravorg receives a +10 bonus
on Hide checks in subterranean areas.
GREENVISE
Huge Plant
Hit Dice: 12d8+48 (102 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 10 ft.
AC: 16 (–2 size, +8 natural), touch 8,
flat-footed 16
Attacks: 4 slams +16 melee and bite
+11 melee
Damage: Slam 2d4+9, bite 1d6+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Death fog,
improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Acid immunity,
plant traits, woodsense
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +4, Will +4
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 10, Con 18, Int 3, Wis 11, Cha 6
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm hills, plains or
marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, or patch (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 13–18 HD (Huge); 19–36 HD
(Gargantuan)
Greenvises are ambulatory vegetable horrors that stalk the
fringes of some humanoid settlements. These carnivorous
plants are not bold—they prefer to ambush lone prey that
happens to come too near. Greenvises rest at night and
actively hunt during daylight hours, repositioning themselves throughout the day if prey in a particular hunting
area proves scarce.
A greenvise is a larger, sturdier version of the venus flytrap, with a thick, green, trunklike stem and four sturdy
tendrils that hang down like vines. When the creature
opens its mouth, a mottled pink maw lined with toothlike
thorns is revealed; when closed, the mouth structure
resembles an ordinary leafy bush. A greenvise has small,
tendrillike roots that it uses to move.
COMBAT
After setting itself up in an appropriate location, a greenvise lies in wait for
prey to pass. It lunges at the first living
creature it senses, using all its tendrils to grab the prey and transfer it
to its maw. An extremely hungry or seriously hurt greenvise releases a death fog to
weaken its opponents and obscure their vision. Although
multiple greenvises are
sometimes found together, they do not share
their prey and thus do
not assist each other in
combat unless many
potential victims are
present.
Death Fog (Su):
Twice per day, a greenvise can emit an acidic
fog that functions like
an acid fog spell,
except as follows.
The death fog’s
area is a 40-foothigh spread with a
60-foot radius. Within this area, all
sight, including darkvision, is limited to
5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has onehalf concealment (attacks against it have a
20% miss chance). Creatures farther away have total concealment (50% miss chance, and the attacker can’t use
sight to locate the target). Any creature attempting to
move through the death fog progresses at one -tenth
normal speed, and each of its melee attack and melee
damage rolls incurs a –2 circumstance penalty. A death
fog prevents effective ranged weapon attacks, except for
magic rays and the like.
GREENVISE
RGMIn addition to obscuring sight, a death fog is highly
acidic. Each round, the fog deals 3d8 points of acid damage
to every creature and object within it (no saving throw). A
severe wind (31+ mph) disperses these vapors in 1d2
rounds; otherwise, the effect lasts for 3d6+1 rounds. The
greenvise is not impeded by its own death fog, so it can
move and fight within the fog freely.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a greenvise hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +26). If it gets a hold, it can
transfer the opponent to its maw with another successful
grapple check, dealing automatic bite damage, then try to
swallow in the next round. Alternatively, the greenvise
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its tendrils or maw to hold the opponent (–20 penalty
on grapple check, but the greenvise is not considered
grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it
makes during successive rounds automatically deals slam
or bite damage, as appropriate.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A greenvise can swallow a single
creature that is at least one size category smaller than itself
by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +26),
provided it already has that opponent in its maw (see
Improved Grab, above). Once inside the greenvise, the
opponent takes 2d6+9 points of bludgeoning damage
and 2d4 points of acid damage per round from the
plant’s stomach. A successful grapple check allows
the swallowed creature to climb out of the stomach and return to the greenvise’s maw,
where another successful grapple check is
needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out
with either claws or a light piercing or
slashing weapon. Dealing at least
20 points of damage to the stomach (AC 18) in this way creates an
opening large enough to permit escape.
Once a single swallowed creature exits,
muscular action closes the hole; thus, another
swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A
greenvise’s stomach can hold 1 Large, 4 Medium-size,
16 Small, or 64 Tiny or smaller opponents.
Plant Traits (Ex): A greenvise is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or mindaffecting effects. The creature also has lowlight vision.
Woodsense (Ex): A greenvise can automatically sense the location of anything within
60 feet that is in contact with vegetation, even objects or creatures that are
not in contact with the same vegetation as it is.
GRELL
Medium-Size Aberration
Hit Dice: 5d8+10 (32 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 5 ft., fly 30 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 10 tentacles +4 melee and bite –1 melee
Damage: Tentacle 1d4+1 plus paralyzation, bite 2d4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. (10 ft. with tentacle)
Special Attacks: Improved grab, paralysis
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., flight, immunities,
tentacle regeneration
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +4
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 9
Skills: Hide +12, Listen +4, Move Silently +12, Spot +8
Feats: Flyby Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or pack (3–7)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: 6–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–15 HD (Large)
These horrible, misshapen creatures resemble giant, floating brains with tentacles. They inhabit dungeons, underground passages, remote caves, and other places
where light never reaches. Humanoids of all
kinds are their favorite prey.
This vicious predator has a large, bulbous body composed of wrinkled, light
gray flesh that seems to float in the air
of its own volition. Ten long, spiny tentacles hang from the bottom of its
body, twisting in the air like ropes. A
grell has a sharp beak that it uses for tearing the flesh of its prey, but no other visible
facial features.
COMBAT
A grell prefers to wait in ambush for
potential prey. When a suitable target
passes, the monster attempts to paralyze it with its tentacles, then escape to
its lair with its helpless prey. Grells are
cunning enough to avoid direct confrontations with large groups, since
they are aware of the dangers that foes
capable of teamwork can present.
A grell occasionally shadows a
group that is too large to attack
directly, following along inconspicuously and using its Hide skill
to stay out of sight. When a member
of the target group lags behind, or
121
GRELL
LGW122
the group is distracted by some other hazard, the grell
attacks a straggler and tries to drag away its meal unnoticed.
Grells also sometimes lurk near dangerous areas, such as pit
traps, quicksand, or the lairs of other monsters, hoping to
prey upon trapped, helpless, or wounded creatures.
In melee combat, a grell can attack as many foes as it can
reach, using as many of its tentacles as it wishes against any
single opponent. It uses its bite only against paralyzed prey
or as a last resort.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a grell hits an opponent that is
at least one size category smaller than itself with a tentacle
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +20, including a +16 racial
bonus on grapple checks). If it gets a hold, it has the option
to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use a single tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the grell is not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals tentacle damage.
Paralysis (Ex): A grell’s tentacles are lined with small
spiny barbs, much like a squid’s. (This is clearly a classic
case of convergent evolution, since the two creatures are
completely unrelated.) Any creature hit by a grell’s tentacle must make a Fortitude save (DC 14) or be paralyzed for
4 rounds.
Blindsight (Ex): A grell is blind, but it maneuvers and
fights as well as a sighted creature by using scent
and vibration to ascertain its surroundings.
This ability enables it to discern objects and
creatures within 60 feet. The grell usually
does not need to make Spot or Listen
checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Flight (Ex): A grell’s body is unusually
buoyant. The creature continuously produces
an effect like that of the fly spell, which it can use
to move at a speed of 30 feet (perfect maneuverability). This buoyancy also grants the grell a permanent feather fall effect with personal range.
Immunities (Ex): A grell is immune to electricity and paralysis effects.
Tentacle Regeneration (Ex): Foes can
attack a grell’s tentacles, but only when those
appendages are actually holding an opponent. A tentacle has an AC of 19 (touch 12)
and can withstand 10 points of damage.
The loss of a tentacle does not harm the
creature (that is, the damage does not
apply against its hit point total), and it
regrows the limb within a day.
Skills: A grell gains a +2 racial
bonus on Hide and Move
Silently checks.
GRIMALKIN
Medium-Size Shapechanger
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 12 (+1 Dex, +1 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 claws +2 melee and bite –3 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4–1, bite 1d6–1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., empathy, polymorph
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +5
Abilities: Str 9, Dex 12, Con 11, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 12
Skills: Climb +6, Hide +3, Jump +6, Listen +3, Move
Silently +8, Spot +3
Feats: Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Temperate plains
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size); 9–12 HD
(Large)
Prized pets and dedicated guard animals, the shapeshifting
grimalkins are found among many civilized societies. Most
of these unusual creatures are domesticated, so it is rare to
see one in the wild.
The mutable nature of the grimalkin allows it to take on
a wide variety of animal forms, though its preferred form
is its natural one—that
of an oversized, blue -
gray housecat. When it
is feeling playful, a grimalkin performs for its
master by changing into
amusing or beguiling
forms. It adopts a more
threatening form when
defending itself from
an attack.
A grimalkin bonds
with one master and
remains his or her loyal
companion for life. Its
personality is extremely
malleable, and over time
the grimalkin takes on a
disposition similar to
that of its owner.
Grimalkins speak
Common. They are
chatty creatures that
never know when to
keep quiet.
GRIMALKIN
DCCOMBAT
A grimalkin changes its shape each round
during a battle to confuse its foes. This makes it
very difficult to adopt any sort of strategy for
fighting it. A grimalkin fights to the death
when defending its master, though it is
quite willing to flee a battle that is going
badly for it while it is alone.
Empathy (Ex): A grimalkin can detect
the surface emotions of any creature within
50 feet that it can see. It can sense basic
needs, drives, and emotions, but not thoughts.
A successful Will save (DC 13) allows a target
to avoid being sensed in this way by that
grimalkin for 24 hours thereafter.
Polymorph (Su): As a free action, a
grimalkin can produce an effect like
that of a polymorph self spell, except as
follows. The creature may take the
form of any Medium-size or smaller
animal, beast, or vermin, but it does not
regain hit points when changing forms.
Skills: A grimalkin has a +4 racial bonus on Move Silently
checks and a +2 racial bonus on Climb and Jump checks.
GRIZZLY MASTODON
Huge Beast
Hit Dice: 15d10+90 (172 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 16 (–2 size, +8 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Slam +21 melee and 2 stamps +16 melee, or gore
+21 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+12, stamp 2d6+6, gore 4d8+12
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Trample 4d8+18
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +15, Ref +9, Will +7
Abilities: Str 35, Dex 10, Con 23, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 7
Skills: Listen +10, Spot +9
Climate/Terrain: Cold and temperate hills and forests
Organization: Solitary or herd (6–30)
Challenge Rating: 13
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 16–21 HD (Huge); 22–45 HD
(Gargantuan)
These larger, more temperamental cousins of the elephant
roam subarctic and arctic lands. The great strength and
endurance of these tremendous herbivores make them
highly desirable to giants, who capture and tame them for
use as mounts and beasts of burden.
Suspicious and
unfriendly by nature, grizzly
mastodons are highly protective of their young and their
feeding grounds. They never hesitate to drive away intruders, stomping underfoot any who are unwise enough to persist. Grizzly mastodons are among the most aggressive creatures alive when it comes to defending their territories
from other groups of mastodons or large herbivores and
protecting their mates and offspring from predators of all
kinds. More than one hungry creature that thought to
make a meal of a young grizzly mastodon has learned a
harsh lesson at the sharp tusks and stomping feet of several
furious adults.
A grizzly mastodon is a shaggy, elephantine creature covered in gray, brown, or black fur. It is called grizzly because
of the sprinkling of gray hairs throughout its coat, like that
of a grizzly bear. Unlike an elephant, a grizzly mastodon has
two pairs of ivory tusks. The typical adult specimen is 20
feet tall and weighs 22,000 pounds.
COMBAT
In combat, grizzly mastodons gore with their four tusks,
then trample opponents underfoot. They prefer to attack in
groups, but they show no fear even when overmatched if the
safety of their young is at stake.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action, a grizzly mastodon
can trample opponents at least one size category smaller
than itself. This attack deals 4d8+18 points of bludgeoning
damage. A trampled opponent can attempt either an attack
of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC 29) for
half damage.
Scent (Ex): A grizzly mastodon can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
123
GRIZZLY
MASTODON124
HALF-FIEND, DURZAGON
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil, Lawful)
Hit Dice: 5d8+10 (32 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 13 (+2 Dex, +1 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 claws +7 melee and bite +2 melee and beard
+2 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+2, bite 1d6+1, beard 1d3+1 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Beard, poison, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Acid resistance 20, cold resistance 20,
darkvision 120 ft., DR 10/+1, duergar traits, electricity
resistance 20, fire resistance 20, immunities, light
sensitivity, outsider traits, SR 15
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +4
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 14, Con 15, Int 14, Wis 11, Cha 8
Skills: Appraise +10, Diplomacy +3, Listen +11, Move
Silently +14, Search +10, Sense Motive +8, Spot +11
Feats: Alertness (B), Improved Initiative, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary, team (1 plus 2–4 duergar), squad
(1 plus 11–20 duergar), or clan (1 plus 30–100 duergar)
Challenge Rating: 4
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil
Advancement: By character class
A durzagon is the result of
secret crossbreeding between
a devil and an unsuspecting
duergar. From time to time,
powerful devils disguised as
gray dwarves infiltrate duergar
society, seeking out the best
mates to bear durzagon children. Most duergar are unaware
that they have attracted the attention of diabolical forces. The birth
of a half-fiend durzagon is cause
for much celebration in the infernal realms.
A durzagon is slightly taller
and leaner than a gray dwarf, usually reaching a height of about 5 feet.
The half-fiend is bald but sports a wiry,
gray beard tinged with red streaks. Its
rust-colored skin radiates a palpable
heat, and its fingers end in wickedly
sharp claws.
Durzagons speak Dwarf and
Undercommon. Those who
learn of their diabolic ancestry also speak Infernal.
COMBAT
Though durzagons relish physical combat, they usually
prefer to use spell-like abilities from behind the protection
of duergar guards. In melee, durzagons show no fear; they
would rather fight to the death than submit to an enemy.
Beard (Ex): If a durzagon hits a single opponent with
both claw attacks, it automatically hits with its beard as well.
Poison (Ex): A durzagon’s poison (Fortitude save DC 14) is
a sulfuric fluid delivered with each successful beard attack.
The initial damage is 1d4 points of Strength damage, and the
secondary damage is 1d2 points of Strength drain.
Spell-Like Abilities: 3/day—darkness, 1/day—desecrate,
enlarge (self only), invisibility, unholy blight. Caster level 10th;
save DC 9 + spell level.
Duergar Traits: A durzagon gains a +1 bonus on attack
rolls against orcs and goblinoids, a +2 bonus on Will saves
against spells and spell-like abilities, and a +4 dodge bonus against giants. It also has stonecunning (+2 racial bonus
on checks to notice unusual stonework; intuit depth).
Immunities (Ex): A durzagon is immune to paralysis,
phantasms, and poisons.
Light Sensitivity: Exposure to bright light (such as sunlight or a daylight spell) imposes a –2 circumstance penalty
on a durzagon’s attack rolls.
Outsider Traits: A durzagon cannot be raised or resurrected.
Skills: A durzagon gains a +4 racial bonus on Move Silently
checks and a +1 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.
DURZAGON SOCIETY
Durzagons almost always hold leadership positions in duergar society, and a large duergar city may have several
durzagon residents. The gray dwarves revere these
creatures as powerful leaders. Durzagons go to great lengths to keep
the knowledge of their powers a
secret from their enemies and
their allies.
DURZAGON
CHARACTERS
A durzagon’s favored class is
cleric. Like duergar, most
durzagons worship the cruel
dwarven deity, Laduguer.
Durzagon clerics can choose
two of the following domains:
Evil, Law, Magic, and Protection.
A durzagon PC’s effective
character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 7; thus, a 1stlevel durzagon cleric has an
ECL of 8 and is the equivalent of
a 8th-level character.
HALF-FIENDHELLFIRE WYRM
Huge Dragon (Fire)
Hit Dice: 23d12+184 (333 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy)
AC: 36 (–2 size, + 28 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 36
Attacks: Bite +30 melee and 2 claws +25 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+9, claw 2d6+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Breath weapon, crush 2d8+13, frightful
presence, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: DR 20/+5, fiendish form, fire subtype, immunities, infernal aura, keen senses, SR 37,
summon baatezu
Saves: Fort +21, Ref +13, Will +21
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 10, Con 27, Int 23, Wis 26, Cha 28
Skills: Bluff +26, Diplomacy +32, Intimidate +35, Jump
+28, Knowledge (any four) +31, Listen +34, Scry +29,
Search +26, Spot +34
Feats: Flyby Attack, Hover, Improved Initiative, Power
Attack, Quicken Spell-Like Ability, Snatch
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or clutch (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 26
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 24–46 HD (Gargantuan)
Hellfire wyrms are draconic agents of the Nine
Hells of Baator that live among
humanoid races on the Material Plane. They are masterful
power brokers, manipulating people and events in
subtle ways. Hellfire wyrms
can steer rulers to fight in
unjust wars, or support
unholy alliances, or even
commit despotic acts against
their people.
A hellfire wyrm is a
diabolic-looking, winged
dragon with vicious bone
spikes jutting from its head
and shoulders. Smoke rises
continually from its scales,
and its eyes burn an intense
yellow. The monster’s scales
shift in color to give the
appearance of flowing molten
lava, and they stink of brimstone.
Hellfire wyrms entrench themselves
in regional politics by using their knowledge, wealth, and persuasive abilities to force
through their foul agendas. The typical wyrm does not limit
its actions to any one kingdom, and it often has a different
identity for each realm it visits. It takes great pains to hide
its draconic form, usually assuming the shape of a charismatic tiefling when dealing with humanoids and assassinating anyone who learns its true identity. Hellfire wyrms
retreat to secret lairs when not actively scheming.
A hellfire wyrm speaks Draconic, Infernal, and Common,
as well as the languages of any nearby humanoid races.
COMBAT
Utterly fearless and almost unstoppable in battle, hellfire
wyrms are expert tacticians. They keep to the air, slinging mindaffecting spells and withering breath attacks at their enemies.
Breath Weapon (Su): A hellfire wyrm can breathe a 50-
foot cone of infernal flame that deals 14d10 points of
damage. Each creature caught in the area can attempt a
Reflex save (DC 29) to take half damage. One-half of the
damage from this attack derives from infernal power and is
therefore not subject to reduction by protective elemental
magic. Once the wyrm breathes, it must wait 1d4 rounds
before using its breath weapon again.
Crush (Ex): A flying hellfire wyrm can land on opponents
three or more size categories smaller than itself as a standard
action, using its whole body to crush them. A crush attack
affects as many creatures as can fit under the wyrm’s body.
Each creature in the affected area must succeed at a Reflex save
(DC 29) or be pinned, automatically taking 2d8+13 points of
bludgeoning damage. Thereafter, if the wyrm chooses to maintain the pin, treat it as a normal grapple attack
(grapple bonus +40). While pinned, the opponent takes crush damage each round.
Frightful Presence (Ex): When a
hellfire wyrm charges, attacks, or flies
overhead, it inspires terror in
all creatures within 240 feet
that have fewer Hit Dice or levels
than it has. Each potentially affected opponent must attempt
a Will save (DC 30). On a
failure, a creature with 4 or
fewer Hit Dice becomes panicked for 4d6 rounds, and one
with 5 or more Hit Dice becomes
shaken for 4d6 rounds. A successful save leaves that opponent
immune to that hellfire wyrm’s
frightful presence for 24 hours.
Dragons ignore the frightful presence effect of a hellfire wyrm.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—blasphemy,
charm person, demand, desecrate, dictum, fire storm,
greater dispelling, hold person, improved invisibility,
misdirection, pyrotechnics, sending, suggestion, teleport
125
HELLFIRE
WYRM126
without error, true seeing (divine version), unholy aura, unhallow,
wall of fire. Caster level 20th; save DC 19 + spell level.
Fiendish Form (Su): At will, a hellfire wyrm can produce
an effect like that of a shapechange spell, except that only the
normal form of any tiefling or devil may be assumed.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A hellfire wyrm is immune to fire
damage but takes double damage from cold unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, it takes half
damage on a success and double damage on a failure.
Immunities: A hellfire wyrm is immune to sleep and
paralysis effects.
Infernal Aura (Su): Any creature within 5 feet of a hellfire wyrm automatically takes 5d4 points of fire damage per
round. It can suppress this aura as a free action.
Keen Senses (Ex): A hellfire wyrm sees four times as
well as a human in low-light conditions and twice as well in
normal light. It also has darkvision with a range of 120 feet.
Summon Baatezu (Sp): Once per day, a hellfire wyrm may
summon a single barbazu, cornugon, or gelugon with a
100% chance of success. This ability functions like a summon
monster spell of the appropriate level. A summoned devil
automatically returns whence it came after 1 hour. A
baatezu that has just been summoned cannot use its own
summon ability for 1 hour.
Feats: A creature that is flung by a hellfire wyrm after being
snatched travels 100 feet and takes 10d6 points of damage. If
the hellfire wyrm is flying, the creature takes this damage or
the appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
HOOK HORROR
Large Aberration
Hit Dice: 10d8+20 (65 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 22 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +10 natural), touch 12,
flat-footed 19
Attacks: 2 claws +13 melee and bite +8 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+7, bite 2d6+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, power sunder,
rending bite
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., light sensitivity
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +8
Abilities: Str 24, Dex 17, Con 14, Int 7, Wis 12,
Cha 9
Skills: Climb +16, Hide +8*, Jump +15, Listen +13
Feats: Cleave, Improved Trip (B), Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary, pack (5–20), or clan (21–40)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–30 (Huge)
Sly hunters of cavernous subterranean areas, hook horrors
are territorial monsters that distrust intruders and fiercely
protect their hunting grounds. Underground areas where
hook horrors dwell echo with the constant clacking and
scraping sounds of their hooks against stone, as they wend
their way across cliffsides and cavern walls.
A hook horror stands about 9 feet tall and weighs approximately 400 pounds. Its long, powerfully built arms and legs
end in wickedly curved hooks. Its head resembles a vulture’s, with a monstrous beak. Its torso is shaped like a
beetle’s body and covered with a rough, stonelike exoskeleton, studded with sharp, bony protuberances.
Hook horrors normally live in extended family groups or
clans, each of which is ruled by the eldest female. The eldest
male usually leads the clan’s hunters and warriors. The clan
stores its eggs communally, in a central, well-defended area
of its home system of caverns or warrens.
Hook horrors are omnivores, consuming lichens, fungi,
plants, and any animals they can catch. Meat is their preferred food, and drow is rumored to be one of their
favorite meals.
Hook horrors speak Undercommon.
COMBAT
Hook horrors attack in groups, using their climbing skills to
ambush foes from above. They fight cooperatively and work
together against the largest and best armed opponents.
Hook horrors use their arm hooks to trip foes. If a battle
goes poorly, they retreat by
scaling walls.
Improved Grab
(Ex): If a hook horror hits an opponent that is at least
one size category
smaller than itself
with both claw
attacks, it deals
normal damage
and attempts to
start a grapple
as a free action
without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +18). If it
gets a hold, it automatically hits with its
rending bite attack on
the same round. (This
replaces its normal
bite attack for that
round.) Thereafter, the hook
horror has the
HOOK
HORRORoption to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
claws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the hook horror is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals damage for both claw
attacks and a rending bite.
Power Sunder (Ex): A hook horror attempting to
strike a foe’s weapon or shield does not incur an attack
of opportunity. On a successful power sunder
attack, a hook horror deals double damage.
Rending Bite (Ex): A hook horror can
automatically bite a grabbed foe for
3d6+10 points of damage.
Blindsight (Ex): A hook horror
emits high-frequency sounds, inaudible to most other creatures, that
bounce off nearby objects and creatures. This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 60 feet. The hook
horror usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks
to notice creatures within range of its blindsight. A silence
spell negates this ability and forces the hook horror to rely
on its weak vision, which has a range of 10 feet.
Light Sensitivity (Ex): Exposure to bright light
(such as sunlight or a daylight spell) imposes a –2
penalty on a hook horror’s attack rolls.
Skills: *A hook horror receives a +8 racial bonus
on Hide checks when in subterranean areas.
IMMOTH
Large Elemental (Air, Cold, Water)
Hit Dice: 10d8+40 (85 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (perfect), swim 30 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +6 natural), touch 12, flatfooted 15
Attacks: 2 claws +10 melee and tail slap +5 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4+4 plus 1d6 cold, tail slap 1d6+2 plus
1d6 cold plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Ice runes, poison, spells
Special Qualities: Cold subtype, DR 5/+1, elemental
traits, icewalking, immunities, SR 23
Saves: Fort +11, Ref +10, Will +4
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 19, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 21
Skills: Climb +12, Hide +11, Jump +13, Spot +12, Swim +12
Feats: Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any cold
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
Immoths originate from the coldest regions of the Elemental Planes of Air and Water, although their thirst for
knowledge takes them to many other planes of
existence. They tend to dwell in forbidding, freezing regions. Though they are
solitary creatures, immoths maintain
contact with others of
their kind, sharing
secrets and coming
to each other’s aid
when necessary.
An immoth appears as a gleaming, 8-foot-tall giant
carved from dense,
translucent ice. It resembles a bearded, hulking dwarf with icy talons
and a large, crystalline tail.
The creature covers itself
with gemlike nuggets of
enchanted ice called
ice runes.
Immoths seem to
be highly curious
about all forms of
humanoid life, as
well as arcane and divine
magic, but they generally take a great interest in all
things. They barter with intelligent beings for information but show no compunction about taking what they
want by force if more peaceful methods fail. These relentless gatherers of knowledge and secrets hide their information in icy libraries.
One legend that planar travelers tell speaks of why the
immoths seek out information. The tale goes that long
ago, a powerful, mad sorcerer tried to recruit elementals to
serve him. When they refused, he punished them with a
vile curse: They must seek out and collect the words of his
curse and return them to their planar home—a place
referred to in the tale as the Mountain of Ultimate Winter.
According to the story, this place was so cold that spoken
words froze in the air and fell to the ground. The cursed
elementals who lived there took on new forms and
became the creatures now known as immoths. They then
began traveling the planes to find the sorcerer’s words.
This tale bolsters the widely held theory that immoths
believe words themselves to have power. (Certainly, the
verbal components of spells lend some credence to the
idea.) Though the true reasons for their diligent search for
knowledge are unknown, it is clear that the monsters
prize words for their own sake, not merely the knowledge
those words convey.
Immoths eat any sort of living creatures, feeding on the
life essence rather than the actual flesh—though they
127
IMMOTH128
nonetheless consume the latter. It is not known how, or
even whether, immoths reproduce.
Immoths speak Aquan, Auran, and Common.
COMBAT
Before wading into battle, an immoth casts spells
designed to bolster its physical and defensive capabilities.
In melee, it immobilizes as many foes as possible with its
tail poison and uses rune magic to overcome any serious
threats. Most immoths prefer runes that inflict pain or
can debilitate opponents. When seriously threatened,
these monsters flee by walking up the nearest icy cliff. Then, from on high, they cast
damaging spells to deter
foes from following.
Ice Runes (Sp): Any spell
an immoth has prepared
can be inscribed on an ice
nugget. The creature can
trigger the spell contained
in such an ice rune as a free
action. An ice rune remains
magical until triggered by
the immoth. Each immoth has at least 3d4+2
ice runes embedded on
its body. Some wonder
whether this ability
lends credence to the
story about frozen words
in the Mountain of Ultimate Winter.
Poison (Ex): An immoth
delivers its freezing venom
(Fortitude save DC 19) with
each successful tail attack.
The initial damage is paralysis (1d6+2 rounds), and the
secondary damage is 1 point
of Intelligence drain per
round of paralysis.
Spells: An immoth can
cast arcane spells as a 12th-level sorcerer (spells/day 6/8/7/
7/7/6/3; spells known 9/5/5/4/3/2/1; save DC 15 + spell
level). It cannot cast spells with the fire descriptor.
Cold Subtype (Ex): An immoth is immune to cold
damage but takes double damage from fire unless a saving
throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and double damage on
a failure.
Elemental Traits (Ex): An immoth is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits
or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Icewalking (Ex): This ability works like the spider climb
spell, except that it applies to all icy surfaces and it is
always active.
Immunities (Ex): Because of its dense crystalline body,
an immoth takes only half damage from piercing and slashing weapons.
IXITXACHITL
An ixitxachitl is an aquatic creature very similar to a ray—
indeed, many adventurers have mistaken one for the other.
The greatest difference between rays and ixitxachitls is
that the former are simple, inoffensive creatures and the
latter are intelligent, organized, and evil.
Ixitxachitls create lairs by
hollowing out coral reefs to
form bewildering mazes. From
these strongholds, they wage
war on sahuagins, locathahs,
merfolk, coastal humans, and
any other intelligent creatures that encroach on
their territory. They tend
to treat their homes as
badly as they do their enemies,
however, stripping them clean
of all plant and animal life
before moving on to new, unspoiled reefs.
Ixitxachitls are universally
despised by all undersea races
for their rapacious lifestyle, their aggression,
and their habit of enslaving captives. A large ixitxachitl settlement often contains
twice as many slaves as it does
ixitxachitls. Anything that can
survive underwater can be found
captive in an ixitxachitl maze,
including nixies, gargoyles, and
even humans or elves who are
wearing magic items that allow
underwater breathing.
AVERAGE IXITXACHITL
Like a manta ray, an average ixitxachitl has a plain brown or
black topside with a lighter-colored underside and a long
tail. But this is where the resemblance ends. An ixitxachitl’s large mouth is filled with triangular, razor-sharp
teeth, and its eyes are intelligent and cruel.
Combat
Individually, ixitxachitls are quite weak. They seldom attack
unless they have overwhelming numbers or the opportunity to spring an ambush. They have been known to conceal
IXITXACHITL
LGWthemselves in the sand and muck of the sea bottom, waiting
for enemies to pass by so they can rush in among them.
VAMPIRIC IXITXACHITL
Vampiric ixitxachitls are not undead, though they do
share several traits with vampires, such as long canine
teeth and the ability to drain energy. Vampiric ixitxachitls
are immune to turning attempts and do not possess the
standard undead traits. One of these monsters usually
leads any group of average ixitxachitls.
Combat
Vampiric ixitxachitls prefer to hang back, hidden, and
allow their underlings to enter combat while they size up
the opposition, If the fight is going well, they join in, looking for easy targets. If the outcome seems doubtful, they
try to support their underlings in strikes against the most
dangerous-looking foe.
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature hit by a vampiric
ixitxachitl’s bite attack gains one negative level. For each negative level bestowed, the vampiric ixitxachitl heals 5 points of
damage. If the amount of healing is more than the damage the
creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit points.
If the negative level has not been removed (with a spell such as
restoration) before 24 hours have passed, the afflicted opponent
must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 12) to remove it. (The
vampiric ixitxachitl uses its Constitution modifier instead of
its Charisma modifier to determine the save DC.) Failure
means the opponent’s level (or Hit Dice) is reduced by one.
Fast Healing (Ex): A vampiric ixitxachitl regains lost
hit points at the rate of 5 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the vampiric ixitxachitl to regrow or
reattach lost body parts.
IXITXACHITL SOCIETY
Though they are occasionally encountered in rivers that
empty into the sea, most ixitxachitls live in shallow ocean
depths or coral reefs. Once they have selected a site for their
lair, they have their slaves carve out a lair for them. Any group
of ixitxachitls is led by a single powerful individual (usually a
cleric or a vampiric ixitxachitl) that rules by intimidation.
IXITXACHITL CHARACTERS
Some ixitxachitls are accomplished clerics, generally serving any chaotic evil deity (and having access to the Chaos
129
IXITXACHITL
Average Ixitxachitl Vampiric Ixitxachitl
Small Aberration (Aquatic) Small Aberration (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 1d8+1 (5 hp) 2d8+2 (11 hp)
Initiative: +3 +3
Speed: Swim 30 ft. Swim 30 ft.
AC: 16 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural), 16 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +2 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 13 touch 14, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Bite +2 melee Bite +3 melee
Damage: Bite 1d6+1 Bite 1d6+1 plus energy drain
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — Energy drain
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft. Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +3 Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +4
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 16, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 7 Str 12, Dex 16, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +11, Intuit Direction +5, Knowledge Hide +11, Intuit Direction +5, Knowledge
(nature) +5, Listen +5, Spot +5, Swim +9, (nature) +5, Listen +6, Spot +6, Swim +9,
Tumble +7 Tumble +7
Feats: Dodge Dodge
Climate/Terrain: Warm aquatic Warm aquatic
Organization: Solitary, pair, pod (5–12 plus 1 2nd-level cleric), Solitary, pair, pod (1–2 plus 5–12 average
or shoal (10–100 plus 5 2nd-level clerics, 2 ixitxachitls and 1 2nd-level cleric), or shoal
5th-level clerics, and 20–200 slaves) (1–2 plus 10–100 average ixitxachitl,
5 2nd-level clerics, 2 5th-level clerics,
and 20–200 slaves
Challenge Rating: 1 3
Treasure: No coins, no goods, double items No coins, no goods, double items
(wearable items only) (no weapons, potions, or scrolls)
Alignment: Always chaotic evil Always chaotic evil
Advancement: By character class 3–4 HD (Small); 5–6 HD (Medium-size);
7–8 HD (Large); or by character class130
and Evil domains), but occasionally following Erythnul
specifically. An ixitxachitl’s favored class is cleric.
An average ixitxachitl PC’s effective character level
(ECL) is equal to its class level + 2. Thus, a 1st-level ixitxachitl cleric has an ECL of 3 and is the equivalent of a 3rdlevel character. A vampiric ixitxachitl PC’s effective
character level (ECL) is equal to its class level + 5. Thus,
a 1st-level vampiric ixitxachitl cleric has an ECL of 6 and
is the equivalent of a 6th-level character.
JAHI
Tiny Undead (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 25d12 (162 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (+2 size, +4 deflection), touch 16,
flat-footed 16
Attacks: Incorporeal touch +14
melee
Damage: Incorporeal touch
1d3 plus 1d4 Charisma
damage
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2
ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Charisma damage, Charisma
drain, dominate person
Special Qualities: Incorporeal subtype, invest
Charisma, SR 27, undead traits
Saves: Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +18
Abilities: Str —, Dex 11, Con —, Int 15, Wis 15, Cha 18
Skills: Balance +2, Bluff +9, Diplomacy +16, Escape Artist
+15, Hide +18, Intimidate +6, Jump +2, Listen +14,
Search +12, Sense Motive +12, Spot +14, Tumble +15
Feats: Ability Focus (dominate person), Alertness, BlindFight, Expertise, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative, Iron
Will, Lightning Reflexes, Quicken Spell-Like Ability
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary or harim (1 plus 1 14th-level
chosen one and 4–20 7th-level followers)
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil
Advancement: 26–50 HD (Tiny)
The jahi is an incorporeal undead made of unfulfilled
desires. It attacks by magically dominating its prey.
The jahi appears as a ghostly image of a serpentine, scaled
worm with three elongated faces. Normally, it is found
wrapped around the throat or chest of a creature it has
selected to be its “chosen one.”
A jahi prefers to work behind the mask of its chosen one,
letting the blame for any excesses fall upon the latter. Once
it has a chosen one, the monster begins to accumulate a
group of dominated followers, who form the nucleus
of a debauched cult dedicated to the jahi’s worship.
The creature feeds off the
Charisma of these followers,
all the while encouraging
them to greater heights of
hedonistic excess.
COMBAT
Jahis are sometimes encountered alone, but more
often they have numerous
enslaved individuals nearby.
If encountered alone, the
monster selects the individual with the most pleasing
appearance as its chosen
one. If it can successfully
dominate that opponent,
it drains his or her Charisma and replaces it with
its own.
Charisma Damage (Su):
Any creature hit by a jahi’s
incorporeal touch attack
takes 1d4 points of Charisma damage (or twice that
amount on a critical hit).
The jahi heals 5 points of damage (or 10 on a critical hit)
whenever it deals Charisma damage.
Charisma Drain (Su): Each day, a jahi’s chosen one (if
any) must make a Fortitude save (DC 26) or permanently
lose 1d3 points of Charisma. The jahi heals 5 points of
damage whenever it drains Charisma, gaining any excess as
temporary hit points.
Dominate Person (Sp): Up to four times per day, a jahi
can use dominate person (caster level 20th; save DC 20).
Incorporeal Subtype: A jahi can be harmed only by
other incorporeal creatures, +1 or better magic weapons,
spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. The
creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal source, except for force effects or attacks made with
ghost touch weapons. A jahi can pass through solid objects,
but not force effects, at will. Its attacks ignore natural
armor, armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and
force effects work normally against them. A jahi always
moves silently and cannot be heard with Listen checks if it
doesn’t wish to be.
Invest Charisma (Ex): After draining all the Charisma
from its chosen one, a jahi can automatically adhere to
that creature (usually by wrapping around its throat or
chest) and replace the lost Charisma with its own. While
so invested, the creature uses the jahi’s Charisma for all
JAHICharisma-based checks. This investment lasts as long as the
jahi and the chosen one are in physical contact. If seriously
threatened, or if it decides to select another chosen one, the
jahi detaches, removing the investment of its Charisma.
At that point, the chosen one’s Charisma score falls to 0
and he or she becomes unconscious until at least 1 point of
Charisma has been regained.
Undead Traits: A jahi is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a
Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. A jahi
cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is willing.
The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
JERMLAINE
Tiny Fey
Hit Dice: 1/2 d6–1 (1 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 size, +3 Dex), touch 15, flat-footed 12
Attacks: Diminutive dart +5 ranged, or Tiny shortspear
–2 melee
Damage: Diminutive dart 1d3–4, Tiny shortspear 1d3–4/×3
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Qualities: Low-light
vision, speak with rats
Saves: Fort –1, Ref +5,
Will +5
Abilities: Str 3, Dex
17, Con 8, Int 8, Wis
16, Cha 5
Skills: Animal Empathy
+1, Craft (trapmaking)
+3, Hide +15, Listen +9,
Move Silently +7, Spot +9
Feats: Alertness
Climate/Terrain:
Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair,
gang (3–5), raiding party
(4–16 plus 2–8 rats or 1–4
giant rats), or plague
(10–60 plus 4–16 rats
or 2–8 giant rats)
Challenge Rating: 1/2
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually
neutral evil
Advancement: 1–2 HD (Tiny)
Jermlaines, sometimes called jinxkin or banemidges, are
tiny humanoid-shaped beings with foul dispositions and
evil designs. They are remarkably adept at hiding and
sneaking, so they are the enemies of all who venture
underground.
A jermlaine appears to be a shaggy humanoid about 1 foot
tall. Its eyes are tiny and beady, and its hair is sparse and
filthy. It either dresses in dirty rags and scraps of hide or
simply goes naked. Its skin is baggy, wrinkled, and always
crusted with filth.
Jermlaines’ speech amounts to high-pitched chitters
and squeaks that are easily mistaken for the noises produced by rats or bats. (Indeed, rats are among the few
living creatures that will have anything to do with them.)
A few jermlaines can speak Common, Dwarf, Gnome,
Goblin, or Orc, but seldom can any individual speak more
than one of those languages.
COMBAT
Jermlaines attack only from ambush. If an ambush is impossible, they hide and wait until it is feasible. They always try
to single out injured, ill, or sleeping foes as their first targets.
Jermlaines enjoy sneaking into camps and vandalizing or
stealing equipment, so long as they stand a good chance of
getting away without combat.
Rather than confront an enemy, jermlaines prefer to dig
pits or build net-dropping traps and other
devices that can capture prey
without a fight. Once an enemy is caught in a pit or a
net, jermlaines swarm
over him, pummeling to
cause subdual damage
until the target is knocked
out. They have also been
known to pour acid or
flaming oil over
trapped foes that
appeared too
dangerous to approach directly,
even while trapped.
Speak with Rats
(Sp): At will, a jermlaine can produce an
effect like that of a speak
with animals spell (caster
level 3rd), except that it
enables communication only with rats
and dire rats.
131
JERMLAINE132
JUGGERNAUT
Huge Construct
Hit Dice: 18d10 (99 hp)
Initiative: –4
Speed: 10 ft.
AC: 29 (–2 size, –4 Dex, +25 natural), touch 4, flat-footed 29
Attacks: 6 slams +21 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+10
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, spell-like abilities, squash
10d10+20
Special Qualities: All-around vision, DR 20/+2, construct
traits, fast healing 10, immunities, SR 36
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +2, Will +8
Abilities: Str 31, Dex 3, Con —, Int —, Wis 15, Cha 16
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 19–32 HD (Huge); 33–54 HD (Gargantuan)
A juggernaut is a stony behemoth that serves as a weapon of
war. Whether deployed to soften up the enemy prior to an
invasion or used for defensive purposes, a juggernaut combines sheer size and magical abilities into a potent, nearly
unstoppable force.
A juggernaut appears
as a squat, square or round
stone building situated
atop wide stone rollers.
Six sturdy stone arms jut
from its sides, three on
the right and three on
the left. A juggernaut is
often decorated with
frightening stone carvings and horrific painted
icons, making it a terrible
sight to behold. Occasionally a juggernaut is
constructed with an
interior hiding space
that can accommodate
up to two Medium-size
creatures safely.
COMBAT
A juggernaut attacks by
rolling slowly forward,
crushing all in its path
to dust. Those who avoid
this attack find themselves targeted by the
construct’s powerful fists, which try to force them under its
rollers. A juggernaut targets escaping foes with spell-like
abilities that hinder or block movement, and then changes
direction to roll over immobile creatures. It stops only when
changing direction or when blocked by some insurmountable obstacle. A juggernaut uses wall of force not only to block
fleeing opponents, but also to make bridges over rivers and
chasms so that it can pursue escaping targets.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a juggernaut hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +31). If it gets a hold, it can
attempt to thrust the opponent under its rollers in the next
round, dealing automatic squash damage. Alternatively, the
juggernaut has the option to conduct the grapple normally,
or simply use its hand to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the juggernaut is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—forcecage, grease, hold monster, magic missile, slow, wall of force, web. Caster level 18th; save
DC 13 + spell level.
Squash (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a juggernaut can literally roll over opponents at least
one size category smaller than itself. This attack deals
10d10+20 points of bludgeoning damage. A squashed opponent can attempt either an
attack of opportunity at a –4
penalty or a Reflex save (DC
29) for half damage. A successful saving throw indicates that the target has
been pushed back or aside
(target’s choice) as the juggernaut moves forward.
All-Around Vision
(Ex): A juggernaut can see
in all directions at once.
Because of this ability, it
gains a +4 racial bonus on
Search and Spot checks,
and it cannot be flanked.
Construct Traits: A
juggernaut is immune to
mind-affecting effects,
poison, sleep, paralysis,
stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that
requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on
objects. The creature is
not subject to critical hits,
subdual damage, ability
JUGGERNAUTdamage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. It cannot heal itself but can be healed through
repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A juggernaut has
darkvision (60-foot range).
Fast Healing (Ex): A juggernaut regains lost hit points at
the rate of 10 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit
points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does
not allow the juggernaut to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Immunities (Ex): A juggernaut is immune to acid, electricity, and fire.
CONSTRUCTION
Since a juggernaut is constructed from
massive blocks of granite and other dense
stone, a typical specimen weighs at least
50,000 pounds. It costs 70,000 gp to create,
including 5,000 gp for the body. Assembling
the body requires a successful Craft (sculpting)
or Profession (mason) check (DC 18). The creator
must be 18th level and able to cast arcane spells. Completing the ritual drains 2,000 XP from the creator and
requires the bull’s strength, geas/quest, limited wish, polymorph any object, forcecage, grease, hold monster,
magic missile, slow, wall of force, and web spells.
JULAJIMUS
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 16d8+80 (152 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 22 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 20
Attacks: Bite +19 melee and 2
claws +14 melee
Damage: Bite 3d10+9, claw 3d8+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear aura, roar, stunning
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 20/+2, enchantment immunity, polymorph self, fire resistance 20,
sunlight vulnerability
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +7, Will +10
Abilities: Str 28, Dex 15, Con 20, Int 12, Wis 11, Cha 15
Skills: Climb +17, Disguise +12*, Intimidate +10, Jump
+17, Listen +8, Spot +8
Feats: Cleave, Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Skill
Focus (Disguise)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate forests
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 17–32 HD (Gargantuan); 33–48 HD
(Colossal)
Villagers often tell stories of the julajimus to their children.
At some point in such a tale, the main character, a child,
takes in a cute animal as a pet despite repeated warnings
from his or her parents that there isn’t enough food or space
for the creature. The story ends with the rebellious child
hiding the creature, only to have it turn into a julajimus one
night and eat the child alive. In fact, the name “julajimus” is
derived from an ancient phrase “julaji molus,” or “eater of
children.” Ancient texts hint that the cult of an evil god created the first julajimuses from human prisoners.
A julajimus stands a bit more than 18 feet tall and
looks somewhat like a massive baboon. Its arms are
long and muscular, with four fully articulated joints
each. The monster has dark blue or black fur covering its body, plus a long, blue, reptilian
tail. The mouth of a julajimus is disproportionally large for the head and filled
with razor-sharp teeth the size of
scimitar blades.
Julajimuses are territorial, gathering in pairs only once per decade
to mate. The presence of a julajimus in an area has a strange
effect on nearby wildlife, causing animals to
become more aggressive than normal. The
monster is not afraid of
civilization, and the
lights of a village
at night can attract a curious
julajimus to
i n v e s t i g a t e .
Julajimuses
speak Common.
COMBAT
The julajimus enjoys the sensation of gnawing on living
creatures, so it always attacks with its bite first, then follows
up with slashes from its two claws. Despite its size, the julajimus is fast and can easily outrun most prey.
Fear Aura (Su): A julajimus radiates a fear aura that can
chill the blood of the bravest warrior. Any living creature
within 20 feet of the monster must make a Will save (DC 20)
or become frightened. Anyone who saves successfully is
immune to this ability for 24 hours. Each round, a frightened subject gets a new saving throw at the same DC. This is
a mind-affecting fear effect.
Roar (Su): Three times per day, a julajimus can loose an earsplitting roar that can be heard for miles. Every creature within
60 feet must make a Fortitude save (DC 23) or become deafened for 3d6 hours and take 6d6 points of subdual damage.
Stunning (Su): If a julajimus successfully scores a critical
hit with its claws, the opponent must make a Fortitude save
133
JULAJIMUS134
(DC 23) or be stunned for 1d4 rounds by the force of the
blow. A stunned creature is unable to act and loses any positive Dexterity bonus to AC. Furthermore, any attacker gains
a +2 bonus on attack rolls against it.
Enchantment Immunity (Ex): A julajimus is immune
to all spells of the Enchantment school.
Polymorph Self (Su): At will, a julajimus can produce an
effect like that of the polymorph self spell, except that the
only forms it can assume are those of small, cuddly animals
(such as a rabbit, chipmunk, or kitten), and reverting to its
true form is a free action. This ability helps the julajimus
lull its victim into a false sense of security before it shifts
into its natural form to attack.
Sunlight Vulnerability (Ex): A julajimus becomes
paralyzed when exposed to sunlight. Each round, it can
make a Fortitude save (DC 20) to resist the paralysis.
Once paralyzed, it is helpless, although its damage reduction and fire resistance still make it difficult to kill. The
paralysis lasts for 1d4 rounds after the exposure to sunlight ends.
Skills: *A julajimus receives a +10 on Disguise checks
when using its polymorph self ability.
KOPRU
Medium-Size Monstrous Humanoid (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 8d8 (36 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 5 ft., swim 40 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Tail slap +10 melee and 2 claws +8 melee and bite
+8 melee
Damage: Tail slap 1d6+2, claw 1d4+1, bite 1d4+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 3d6+3, dominate person,
improved grab
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft.
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +8, Will +9
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 14, Con 11, Int 11, Wis 12, Cha 10
Skills: Concentration +11, Escape Artist +11, Move
Silently +10, Search +8, Swim +10
Feats: Iron Will, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Warm aquatic and marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, patrol (3–5), or colony (6–24)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: Standard coins (gold and platinum only), standard goods (gems only), no items
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 9–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–12 HD (Large)
Many generations ago, the koprus built a large and mysterious civilization under the sea. For unknown reasons their
society declined, becoming ever more decrepit and degenerate, until now almost none of its former glory remains.
A kopru resembles no known creature, but it combines
several familiar features into one monstrous whole. Its body
is vaguely eellike but ends in three long, flexible, barbed
tails. Its chest is nearly human, and the hands on its two
arms end in vicious webbed claws. Its head grows directly
from its trunk, like a fish’s, and has large, unblinking eyes.
The mouth is surrounded by four tentacles—an oddity that
has led some scholars to propose that the koprus may somehow be related to mind flayers.
Koprus speak Common and Aquan.
COMBAT
Out of the water, a kopru is nearly helpless. On land, it
cannot attack with its claws because it needs its arms to drag
itself across the ground or prop its body up. A kopru in
water, however, is a ferocious opponent in melee combat.
Along with its claws and teeth, it lashes out with its tails, all
three of which strike as one.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a kopru
can constrict a grabbed opponent, dealing 3d6+3 points of
bludgeoning damage.
Dominate Person (Su): Once per day, a kopru can produce an effect like that of a dominate person spell (caster level
10th; Will save DC 14), except that the range is 180 feet and
the duration is eight days.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a kopru hits an opponent that is its
own size or smaller with a tail attack, it deals normal damage
KOPRU
JEand attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +17, including a +7 racial bonus on grapple checks). If it gets a hold, it also
constricts in the same round. Thereafter, the kopru has the
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tails
to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
kopru is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals tail and constrict damage.
KOPRU SOCIETY
Kopru society is matriarchal and savage. The monsters live
in underwater caves, often near the sites of their ancient,
ruined cities. But these reminders of their former glory only
serve to increase their bitterness.
LEECHWALKER
Medium-Size Vermin
Hit Dice: 13d8+39 (97 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 30 ft., swim 20 ft.
AC: 12 (+2 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 tentacle rakes +13 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 1d8+4 plus
wounding
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Blood drink,
improved grab, wounding
Special Qualities: All-around
vision, immunities, vermin
traits
Saves: Fort +11, Ref
+4, Will +5
Abilities: Str 18, Dex
11, Con 16, Int —,
Wis 13, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +3, Listen +5, Move
Silently +5, Search +4, Spot +8,
Swim +12
Climate/Terrain: Any
marsh or underground
Organization: Solitary,
pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 14–26 HD (Medium-size); 27–39 HD (Large)
The leechwalker is a thirsty vermin that can drain a creature
of all its blood in a matter of moments. It usually lurks in
swamps or damp underground areas.
A leechwalker appears to be a massive, 6-foot-tall humanoid covered with thousands of dark, writhing leeches.
Though it has a head, it possessses no recognizable facial features. Its body is slick, as if coated with a thin layer of clear
slime, and it has an impossibly bloated stomach.
COMBAT
Leechwalkers are incapable of sizing up prey, so they fearlessly
go straight for the kill, regardless of their opponents’ capabilities. They usually try to grab their foes, hoping to drain blood
through the thousands of mouths that make up their hides.
Blood Drink (Ex): A leechwalker can drink the blood
from a grabbed victim with a successful grapple check. This
attack deals 2d4 points of Constitution drain.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a leechwalker hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with a tentacle rake attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple
bonus +13). If it gets a hold, it can use its blood drink ability in
the same round. Thereafter, the leechwalker has the option to
conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tentacle to
hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
leechwalker is not considered grappled). In either case, each
successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals tentacle rake
and blood drink damage.
Wounding (Ex): A wound
resulting from a leechwalker’s tentacle rake attack
bleeds for an additional 3
points of damage per
round thereafter. Multiple wounds from such
attacks result in cumulative bleeding loss (two
wounds for 6 points of
damage per round, and
so on). The bleeding can
be stopped only by a successful Heal check (DC
10) or the application of
a cure spell or some other
healing spell (heal, healing
circle, or the like).
All-Around Vision (Ex):
A leechwalker can see in all
directions at once. Because of
this ability, it gains a +4 racial bonus
on Search and Spot checks, and it cannot be flanked.
Immunities: Because of the verminous covering of its
body, a leechwalker takes half damage from bludgeoning
weapons. It is not subject to subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, or death from massive damage.
Vermin Traits: A leechwalker is immune to all mindaffecting effects (charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns,
and morale effects). It also has darkvision (60-foot range).
135
LEECHWALKER
MC136
LEGENDARY ANIMALS
Throughout the world, legends describe extraordinary animals of incredible strength, speed, and power. Such an animal
may have saved a village, fended off a pack of predators to protect the young, aided some legendary hero on a divine quest,
or guided a lost child to safety. These are legendary animals.
According to some theories, such creatures have been
imbued with power beyond that of all other animals
so that they can serve as nature’s defenders. In fact,
they do not exist at all until a need for them
arises. Legendary animals are created from normal animals of their
kind through the power of nature
(or a deity) whenever a character
of appropriate level needs such a
companion. Thus, they are rarely
encountered outside the presence
of a high-level druid or some
other advanced character.
COMBAT
Legendary animals are no larger
than normal animals of the same
kind, but they are considerably
more dangerous in combat.
Saving Throws: A legendary
animal has all good saves.
LEGENDARY EAGLE
With its feathers of bright white
and brilliant yellow, the legendary
eagle is considered an omen of good
weather and good times to come.
Combat
Like all birds of prey, the legendary eagle is a carnivore
that hunts other birds, as well as small reptiles, snakes, and
mammals. It attacks from the air with its claws and beak.
Skills: *A legendary eagle receives a +12 racial bonus on
Spot checks made in daylight.
LEGENDARY APE
This ape appears little different from the common gorilla in
its markings, but even the casual observer can tell that it is
stronger, faster, and tougher than others of its kind.
Combat
Legendary apes are aggressive and territorial. They drop on
opponents from trees to rend flesh with their powerful
claws and teeth.
Rend (Ex): If a legendary ape hits a single target with
both claws, it latches onto the opponent’s body and tears the
flesh. This attack deals 2d8+15 points of damage.
Scent (Ex): A legendary ape can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
LEGENDARY WOLF
A fierce-looking wolf with black, white, or gray fur, this
animal is generally not aggressive toward humanoids,
though extreme hunger may make it attack.
Combat
A legendary wolf encountered singly may fight, or may
retreat to assemble the pack. Whenever possible, legendary
wolves live, move, and hunt in packs.
Trip (Ex): A legendary wolf that hits
with a bite attack can attempt to trip the
opponent as a free action (see Trip in
Chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook) without making a touch attack or provoking
an attack of opportunity. If the attempt
fails, the opponent cannot react to
trip the legendary wolf.
Scent (Ex): A legendary wolf
can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track
by sense of smell.
Skills: A legendary wolf
receives a +2 racial bonus on
Listen, Move Silently, and Spot
checks, and a +4 racial bonus
on Hide checks. *It also receives
a +8 racial bonus on Wilderness
Lore checks when tracking by
scent.
LEGENDARY SNAKE
A strong constrictor with a potent
venomous bite, the legendary snake is
found in underwater lakes, rivers, and streams. It
attacks only when threatened.
Combat
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a legendary snake can constrict a grabbed opponent, dealing
1d8+12 points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary snake hits a Large or
smaller opponent with a bite attack, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +24). If it
gets a hold, it can constrict in the same round. Thereafter,
the legendary snake has the option to conduct the grapple
normally, or simply use its coils to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the legendary snake is not
considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals bite and constrict damage.
Poison (Ex): A legendary snake delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 25) with each successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1d8 points of Constitution damage).
LEGENDARY
ANIMALS
JEScent (Ex): A legendary snake can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of
smell.
Skills: A legendary snake receives a +8 racial bonus on
Hide, Listen, and Spot checks, and a +16 racial bonus on Balance checks. It can use its Strength or Dexterity modifier
(whichever is better) for Climb checks.
LEGENDARY HORSE
Legendary horses can never be domesticated, only befriended. Ancient stories tell of heroes riding these creatures, but even the tales have become very rare.
Combat
A legendary horse can fight while carrying a rider, but the
rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds at a Ride
check (DC 10).
Scent (Ex): A legendary horse can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of
smell.
Carrying Capacity: A light load for a legendary horse
is 0–1,200 pounds, a medium load is 1,201–2,400 pounds,
and a heavy load is 2,401–3,600 pounds. A legendary horse
can drag 18,000 pounds.
LEGENDARY BEAR
The legendary bear doesn’t usually attack humans. Its diet
consists primarily of plants and fish.
Combat
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary bear hits a
Medium-size or smaller opponent with a claw attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +32). Thereafter, the legendary bear has
the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use
its claw to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the legendary bear is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it
makes during successive rounds automatically deals
claw damage.
LEGENDARY TIGER
The legendary tiger is the fiercest and most dangerous land
predator in the animal kingdom. It measures 8–10 feet long
and weighs up to 600 pounds.
Combat
A legendary tiger prefers to attack from ambush, pouncing
on its prey.
137
LEGENDARY
ANIMALS
Legendary Eagle Legendary Ape Legendary Wolf
Small Animal Medium-Size Animal Medium-Size Animal
Hit Dice: 12d8+36 (90 hp) 13d8+39 (97 hp) 14d8+70 (133 hp)
Initiative: +10 +3 +9
Speed: 10 ft., fly 100 ft. (average) 40 ft., climb 20 ft. 60 ft.
AC: 25 (+1 size, +10 Dex, +4 natural), 19 (+3 Dex, +6 natural), 24 (+9 Dex, +5 natural),
touch 21, flat-footed 15 touch 13, flat-footed 16 touch 19, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 2 claws +20 melee and bite +15 2 claws +19 melee and bite + 14 Bite +19 melee
melee melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+2, bite 1d8+1 Claw 1d8+10, bite 2d6+5 Bite 2d6 +10
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — Rend 2d8+15 Trip
Special Qualities: Low-light vision Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +11, Ref +18, Will +11 Fort +11, Ref +11, Will +11 Fort +14, Ref +18, Will +11
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 30, Con 17, Str 30, Dex 17, Con 16, Str 25, Dex 28, Con 21,
Int 2, Wis 16, Cha 13 Int 2, Wis 17, Cha 11 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
Skills: Listen +10, Spot +10* Climb +19, Move Silently +11, Hide +13, Listen +10, Move
Spot +9 Silently +12, Spot +10,
Wilderness Lore +4*
Feats: Weapon Finesse (bite) (B), — Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Weapon Finesse (claw) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any forest, hills, plains, Warm forest and mountains, Any forest, hills, mountains,
and mountains and underground plains, and underground
Organization: Solitary or pair Solitary, pair, or company (3–5) Solitary or herd (5–8)
Challenge Rating: 6 7 7
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 13–24 HD (Small) 14–26 HD (Medium-size) 15–30 HD (Medium-size)138
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary tiger hits a
Medium-size or smaller opponent with a bite attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +34). If it gets a hold, it can attempt to rake
in the same round. Thereafter, the legendary tiger has the
LEGENDARY
ANIMALS
Legendary Snake Legendary Horse Legendary Bear
Large Animal Large Animal Large Animal
Hit Dice: 16d8+112 (184 hp) 18d8+144 (225 hp) 20d8+140 (230 hp)
Initiative: +7 +2 +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 80 ft. 50 ft.
AC: 22 (–1 size, +7 Dex, +6 natural), 19 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +8 natural), 21 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +10 natural),
touch 16, flat-footed 15 touch 11, flat-footed 17 touch 11, flat-footed 19
Attacks: Bite +19 melee 2 hooves +21 melee and bite +16 2 claws +27 melee and bite +22
melee melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+12 plus poison Hoof 2d6+9, bite 1d6+4 Claw 2d6+13, bite 4d6+6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft. (coiled)/10 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 1d8+12, improved — Improved grab
grab, poison
Special Qualities: Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent Low-light vision, scent
Saves: Fort +17, Ref +17, Will +12 Fort +19, Ref +13, Will +13 Fort +19, Ref +14, Will +15
Abilities: Str 27, Dex 24, Con 24, Str 29, Dex 14, Con 27, Str 36, Dex 15, Con 25,
Int 1, Wis 14, Cha 7 Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10 Int 2, Wis 16, Cha 13
Skills: Balance +24, Climb +22, Hide +14, Listen +9, Spot +9 Listen +8, Spot +8, Swim +18
Listen +12, Spot +12, Swim +16
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm land, Any land Any forest, hills, mountains,
aquatic, and underground plains, or underground
Organization: Solitary Solitary or herd (6–30) Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 8 8 9
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 17–32 HD (Large) 19–36 HD (Large) 21–40 HD (Large)
Legendary Tiger Legendary Shark
Large Animal Huge Animal (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 26d8+182 (299 hp) 30d8+210 (345 hp)
Initiative: +4 +4
Speed: 50 ft. Swim 100 ft.
AC: 23 (–1 size, +4 Dex, +10 natural), 22 (–2 size, +4 Dex, +10 natural),
touch 13, flat-footed 19 touch 12, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 2 claws +29 melee and bite +24 melee Bite +29 melee
Damage: Claw 2d6+11, bite 2d8+5 Bite 2d8+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, pounce, rake 2d6+5 Improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Low-light vision, scent Keen scent, low-light vision
Saves: Fort +22, Ref +19, Will +17 Fort +24, Ref +21, Will +19
Abilities: Str 33, Dex 18, Con 24, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 11 Str 28, Dex 19, Con 24, Int 1, Wis 14, Cha 7
Skills: Hide +8*, Jump +15, Listen +5, Move Silently +12, Listen +9, Spot +9, Swim +17
Spot +7, Swim +14
Climate/Terrain: Any forest, hill, mountains, plains, and underground Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary or pair Solitary, pair, or school (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 10 10
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 27–48 HD (Large) 31–60 HD (Huge)option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its
jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the legendary tiger is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Pounce (Ex): If a legendary tiger charges, it can make a
full attack (including a rake attempt, see below) even
though it has moved.
Rake (Ex): In any round that a legendary tiger has a hold
on an opponent (see Improved Grab, above), it can make
two rake attacks (+29 melee) with its hind legs for 2d6+5
points of damage each. The legendary tiger can also attempt
to rake when it pounces on an opponent.
Scent (Ex): A legendary tiger can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: A legendary tiger receives a +8 racial bonus on
both Hide and Move Silently checks. *In areas of tall grasses
or heavy undergrowth, the Hide bonus improves to +16.
LEGENDARY SHARK
The legendary shark hunts anything it finds in the sea.
Combat
Improved Grab (Ex): If a legendary shark hits a Large or
smaller opponent with a bite attack, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +39). If it
gets a hold, it can try to swallow in the next round. Alternatively, the legendary shark has the option to conduct the
grapple normally, or simply use its mouth to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the legendary
shark is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds
automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A legendary shark can swallow a
Large or smaller creature by making a successful grapple
check (grapple bonus +39), provided it already has that
opponent in its maw (see Improved Grab, above). Once
inside the legendary shark, the opponent
takes 2d8+13 points of bludgeoning
damage plus 1d8+4 points of acid
damage per round from the shark’s
stomach. A successful grapple check
allows the swallowed creature to
climb out of the stomach and return
to the legendary shark’s mouth,
where another successful grapple
check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to
cut its way out with either claws or a light
piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at
least 50 points of damage to the stomach (AC 18) in this way creates an opening
large enough to permit escape. Once a single
swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole;
thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out.
A legendary shark’s stomach can hold up to 2 Large, 8
Medium-size, 32 Small, or 128 Tiny or smaller opponents.
Keen Scent (Ex): A legendary shark notices creatures by
scent in a 180-foot radius and detects blood in the water at a
range of up to 1 mile.
LEVIATHAN
Colossal Magical Beast (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 32d10 +320 (496 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: Swim 90 ft.
AC: 22 (–8 size, –2 Dex, +22 natural), touch 0, flat-footed 22
Attacks: Bite +39 melee, or 2 tail slams +39 melee
Damage: Bite 4d6+15 and gulp, tail slam 2d6+15
Space/Reach: 50 ft. by 200 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Gulp, ramming, swamping
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 10/–, low-light
vision, SR 36
Saves: Fort +28, Ref +16, Will +13
Abilities: Str 40, Dex 7, Con 30, Int 4, Wis 13, Cha 5
Skills: Listen +5, Spot +5, Swim +23
Feats: Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 25
Treasure: None (see text)
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 33–48 HD (Colossal)
The leviathan is an immense sea creature that takes up residence in a stretch of water, usually a very deep strait, and terrorizes shipping through that zone for years. It sinks some
ships and lets others pass without interference, according to
its own unfathomable whims. Decades
139
LEVIATHAN140
may pass without a sighting; then, for no apparent reason, the
attacks resume, usually in a new location. Whether this is the
same beast awakened from hibernation, the same beast somehow reborn, or an entirely new creature is unknown.
The leviathan is an immense whale of almost unimaginable proportions. Some have seen its head, others have seen
its tail, but those who have seen enough of the monster to
determine its actual size and appearance are dead.
Wherever the leviathan goes, other sea predators follow,
because a sinking ship produces a rich feeding ground for
sharks, barracudas, many varieties of giant fish, dark rays, and
even sahuagin and locathah. Although the leviathan itself has
no interest in treasure, the sea bed beneath its hunting ground
becomes a graveyard for the contents of sunken ships. Many
of these hulks are laden with treasure and valuable cargo.
COMBAT
Obviously, a creature such as the leviathan has no natural enemies. Everything in the ocean is its prey, but ships seem to be
the only things that catch its attention. Once it breaches or
swamps a ship, the leviathan circles back and begins scooping
the bodies of both the living and the dead into its 20-footwide mouth. Its tactics imply a level of anger and a desire to
spread destruction that contradict its low Intelligence score.
Gulp (Ex): A leviathan can swallow a Huge or smaller
creature by making a successful bite attack. The monster’s
interior contains a mass of surging water. Each swallowed
creature must make a Swim check (DC 15) every round.
Success means the swallowed creature takes 1d3 points of
subdual damage but can attack the leviathan from inside
with any weapon other than a bow or crossbow. Failure
means the swallowed creature takes 1d6 points of subdual
damage and must immediately make a second Swim check
(DC 15) to avoid going underwater and starting to drown.
Anyone attacking the leviathan from the inside hits automatically. If the leviathan takes 50 points of damage from
the inside, it disgorges the entire contents of its stomach.
Ramming (Ex): Once every 12 rounds, a leviathan can
move at up to 720 feet and ram a Large or smaller creature or
any sort of ship. To ram, the leviathan must end its movement
in the target’s space. If the target is a ship, the creature always
precedes this attack with a long surface approach so everyone
aboard can see what’s coming. This attack deals 8d6+22 points
of damage. If the target is a creature, it can attempt either an
attack of opportunity or a Reflex save (DC 31) for half damage.
Upon ramming a ship, the leviathan can make a Strength
check to breach its hull, which causes it to sink in 1d10 minutes. The break DC varies with the type of vessel rammed, as
follows: rowboat DC 20, keelboat DC 23, sailing ship or longship DC 25, warship DC 27, or galley DC 30. (See Chapter 5 of
the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide for information about ships.)
Regardless of the check result, every creature aboard must
attempt a Reflex saving throw (DC 15). Success means the creature takes 1d10 points of damage from being thrown about by
the impact; failure means the creature is hurled overboard.
Swamping (Ex): Once every 12 rounds, a leviathan can
create waves up to 40 feet high by rising from the water
and then slamming its enormous tail flukes or head against
the surface. This causes any sailing vessel within 300 feet
to capsize if the character steering it fails a Profession
(sailor) check (DC 15). A modifier applies to this check
based on the type of ship, as follows: rowboat –2, warship +0,
galley or keelboat +3, sailing ship +5, longship +7. Any creature flung into the water by a capsizing ship must succeed at
a Swim check (DC 15) or immediately begin drowning.
LINNORM
Linnorms are truly primeval creatures thought to be offshoots
of dragons. No young ones have been sighted for centuries, so
it is possible that these monsters are dying out. At any rate, by
dragon accounting, the youngest known linnorms are ancient,
and the more powerful individuals are even older than that.
A linnorm is easily distinguished from its more numerous draconic cousins by its lack of wings and rear legs. A
linnorm has an immense, serpentine body, and it moves
through a combination of walking with its forelegs and
snakelike slithering.
No good or lawful linnorms are known to exist; these
creatures are universally hateful, spiteful, and cruel. None
of the three varieties is known for keeping its word or for
honoring bargains. About the best that can be said of linnorms is that not all of them are avaricious.
Linnorms speak Draconic and Abyssal.
COMBAT
Linnorms rely on their breath weapons and prodigious
strength in battle. They are also brilliant tacticians and
strategists, so they usually delay attacking until conditions
are to their advantage. Once battle is joined, they quickly
single out the most dangerous foes for swift elimination.
Breath Weapon (Su): Using a breath weapon is a standard
action. Once a linnorm breathes, it must wait 1d4 rounds
before using a breath weapon again, no matter how many
kinds it has. A blast from a breath weapon always starts at
the linnorm’s mouth and extends in a direction of its choice,
with an area as noted in the description. At the time of use,
the linnorm can choose to shape its breath weapon into
either a line or a cone. The exact dimensions vary with the
variety of linnorm (see the individual descriptions), but
lines are always 5 feet high and 5 feet wide, and cones are as
high and wide as they are long. If the breath weapon deals
damage, each creature caught in the area can attempt a
Reflex save (see individual descriptions for DCs) to take half
damage. Saves against nondamaging breath weapons use the
same DC, but the types vary as noted.
Crush (Ex): A flying linnorm can land on opponents three
or more size categories smaller than itself as a standard action.
A crush attack affects as many creatures as can fit under the linnorm’s body. Each creature in the affected area must succeed
LINNORMat a Reflex save (DC equal to that for the linnorm’s breath
weapon) or be pinned, automatically taking the given amount
of bludgeoning damage. Thereafter, if the linnorm chooses to
maintain the pin, treat it as a normal grapple attack. While
pinned, the opponent takes crush damage each round.
Tail Sweep: A linnorm can sweep with its tail as a standard action. The sweep affects creatures four or more size
categories smaller than the linnorm within a 20-foot-radius
half-circle centered on the linnorm’s rear. Each affected
creature that fails a Reflex save (DC equal to that for the linnorm’s breath weapon) takes the given amount of damage; a
successful save halves the damage.
Blindsight (Ex): A linnorm can ascertain its surroundings by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and scent, but
also by noticing vibration and other environmental clues).
This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures
within 120 feet. A linnorm usually does not need to make
Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Immunities: A linnorm is immune to sleep and paralysis
effects.
Keen Senses (Ex): A linnorm sees four times as well a
human in low-light conditions and twice as well in normal
light. It also has darkvision with a range of 120 feet.
GRAY LINNORM
These creatures are the smallest of the linnorms. They are
also the meanest and most aggressive.
141
LINNORM
Gray Linnorm Dread Linnorm Corpse Tearer
Huge Dragon Colossal Dragon Gargantuan Dragon
Hit Dice: 13d12+65 (149 hp) 20d12+200 (330 hp) 28d12+224 (406 hp)
Initiative: +0 –1 –1
Speed: 30 ft., fly 90 ft. (good), 50 ft., fly 90 ft. (good), 60 ft., burrow 50 ft., fly 90 ft.
swim 30 ft. swim 30 ft. (good), swim 50 ft.
AC: 27 (–2 size, +19 natural), 31 (–8 size, –1 Dex, +30 natural), 33 (–4 size, –1 Dex, +28 natural),
touch 8, flat-footed 27 touch 1, flat-footed 31 touch 5, flat-footed 33
Attacks: Bite +18 melee and 2 claws 2 bites +27 melee and 2 claws +25 Bite +37 melee and 2 claws +35
+16 melee and tail slap melee and tail slap +25 melee melee and tail slap +35 melee
+16 melee
Damage: Bite 2d6+7, claw 2d8+3, Bite 4d8+15 plus energy drain, Bite 4d6+13 plus energy drain,
tail slap 2d6+10 plus poison claw 4d6+7, tail slap 4d6+22 claw 2d8+6, tail slap 2d8+19
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 30 ft./10 ft. 40 ft. by 120 ft./15 ft. 20 ft. by 80 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Breath weapon, crush 2d8+10, Breath weapons, crush 4d8+22, Breath weapon, crush 4d6+19,
poison, spell-like abilities, energy drain, spell-like abilities, energy drain, spell-like abilities,
spells spells, tail sweep 2d8+22 spells, tail sweep 2d6+19
Special Qualities: Blindsight 120 ft., DR 15/+1, Blindsight 120 ft., DR 20/+2, Blindsight 120 ft., DR 30/+3,
immunities, keen senses, SR 31 immunities, keen senses, SR 36 immunities, keen senses, SR 39
Saves: Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +10 Fort +22, Ref +11, Will +18 Fort +24, Ref +15, Will +21
Abilities: Str 24, Dex 11, Con 20, Str 40, Dex 8, Con 31, Str 36, Dex 9, Con 26,
Int 14, Wis 19, Cha 17 Int 15, Wis 22, Cha 21 Int 17, Wis 20, Cha 19
Skills: Bluff +11, Concentration +20, Bluff +24, Concentration +30, Bluff +28, Concentration +30,
Diplomacy +7, Intimidate Diplomacy +7, Intimidate +7, Diplomacy +10, Hide +15,
+5, Knowledge (arcana) +16, Knowledge (arcana) +24, Listen Intimidate +6, Knowledge
Listen +17, Scry +16, Search +26, Scry +24, Search +24, Spellcraft (arcana) +30, Listen +32, Scry
+14, Sense Motive +12, +21, Spot +26, Swim +23 +25, Search +30, Sense Motive
Spellcraft +13, Spot +17, +32, Spellcraft +28, Spot +32,
Swim +15 Swim +21
Feats: Alertness, Flyby Attack, Alertness, Flyby Attack, Alertness, Cleave, Enlarge
Multiattack, Snatch Multiattack, Power Attack, Quicken Spell, Flyby Attack, Multiattack,
Spell-Like Ability, Snatch Power Attack, Quicken Spell-Like
Ability, Snatch
Climate/Terrain: Any hills or mountains Any land Any land
Organization: Solitary Solitary Solitary
Challenge Rating: 20 25 28
Treasure: Standard Standard Double standard
Alignment: Usually chaotic evil Always chaotic evil Always neutral evil
Advancement: 14–18 HD (Huge) 21–26 HD (Colossal) 29–34 HD (Gargantuan)142
The body of a gray linnorm is long, sleek, and very
snakelike. It never uses its two arms to drag or support
itself; instead it moves entirely as a snake, keeping the front
portion of its body raised upright at all times. Its scales form
a subtle pattern of variegated gray.
A gray linnorm lays claim to all that it can see, so it always
seeks out a natural cave in a high place with a commanding
view. By extension, any other creature it sees is a trespasser,
and it never tolerates trespassers in its territory. As soon as it
spots intruders, it moves to attack, usually via either magical flight or wind walking. A gray linnorm does not pause
to study its foes or lay a careful trap; instead, it relies on
speed, terror, and overwhelming offense.
Combat
A gray linnorm casts as many spells as possible while closing
in on enemies, but it prefers fighting tooth and claw to
standing off and pelting foes with magic. On the other
hand, it prefers casting spells to taking a beating, so it always
errs on the side of survival. In dire straits, a gray linnorm
typically uses meld into stone to hide, and then wind walk or
some other spell to leave the area.
Acid Breath (Su): A gray linnorm can breathe caustic
slime in either a 50-foot cone or a 100-foot line. This attack
deals 6d8 points of acid damage, or half that amount on a
successful Reflex save (DC 21). On a failed save, the slime
also eats away the target’s nonmagical metal weapons and
armor, making them useless in 1d6+5 rounds.
Poison (Ex): The tip of a gray linnorm’s tail carries a venomous stinger that delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC
21) with each successful tail slap attack. The initial
damage is 1d6 points of Constitution damage, and the secondary damage is 2d6 points of Constitution damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—fly, protection from arrows;
3/day—contagion, meld into stone, shapechange, wind walk.
Caster level 17th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Spells: A gray linnorm can cast divine spells as a 17thlevel cleric. It has access to spells from the Destruction
and Evil domains (spells/day 6/6/6/6/6/4/4/3/2/1; save
DC 14 + spell level).
Feats: A creature that is flung by a gray linnorm after being
snatched travels 70 feet and takes 7d6 points of damage. If the
gray linnorm is flying, the creature takes this damage or the
appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
DREAD LINNORM
The dread linnorm is the largest of the linnorms. These creatures are aggressively territorial, defending their vast lairs
vigorously against intruders.
A dread linnorm can grow to an immense length. Two
shaggy, draconic heads, each at the end of its own long, serpentine neck, top its mammoth body. A dread linnorm’s
scales are primarily charcoal black, but they shimmer and
flicker from black to gray as if lit from within.
This creature prefers to lair in a cave located in some
remote, desolate place. Few natural caverns are big enough
to house a dread linnorm comfortably, so it usually devotes
considerable energy over the course of several centuries to
excavating its home. Eventually, its lair becomes a tremendous subterranean labyrinth of twisting corridors, plunging shafts, lakes, hot springs, and fabulous natural grottoes,
which can stretch
for miles below
the surface. Invaders could wander for weeks
through a dread
linnorm’s lair
without ever
e n c o u n t e r i n g
the monster. The
creature also fits
out its lair with
deadly traps to
capture, bewilder,
or kill intruders.
These obstacles are
often built around natural perils, such as scalding geysers, and sometimes they include triggers
for hazards, such as massive
rockfalls that can seal passages.
Treasure is not as important to a dread
linnorm as it is to a dragon. A typical dread linnorm accumulates immense wealth over its long life but
LINNORMcares little for it. Most of its treasure lies forgotten wherever
it was dropped after a brief examination. Given the extensiveness of the creature’s lair and the casual way it leaves
valuables strewn about, it might seem easy to sneak in,
scoop up a few bags of gold and silver, and slip away unseen.
In fact, however, such an act unfailingly brings severe retribution. A dread linnorm doesn’t care whether a thief stole a
sack of gems, an ancient magic rod, or a bucket of rocks; it
cares only that the sanctity of its lair was violated and its
possessions stolen. Should this occur, it does all in its
power to recover the stolen items and punish the thieves.
Failing that, it vents its rage on its surroundings, laying
waste to the countryside, leveling villages, burning crops,
and devouring livestock.
Dread linnorms are always surly and uncommunicative.
Combat
A dread linnorm relies primarily on its twin breath weapons
and its spells in combat. Once its opponents are severely
damaged, it switches to melee attacks.
Breath Weapon (Su): As a standard action, a dread linnorm can breathe either with one head or with both heads
simultaneously. It can produce two different breath
weapons, cold or fire, each as either a 70-foot cone or a 140-
foot line. Each head can use a different breath weapon,
shape its breath weapon differently, or both. Whatever the
shape, the cold breath deals 12d6 points of cold damage and
the fire breath deals 12d6 points of fire damage. A successful
Reflex save (DC 30) halves the damage from either attack. A
creature caught in both breath weapons is affected by both
and must save against each one separately.
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature bitten by either
head of a dread linnorm gains one negative level. For each
negative level bestowed, the dread linnorm heals 5 points of
damage. If the amount of healing is more than the damage
the creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit
points. If the negative level has not been removed (with a
spell such as restoration) before 24 hours have passed, the
afflicted opponent must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 25)
to remove it. Failure means the opponent’s level (or Hit
Dice) is reduced by one.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—fly, telekinesis; 4/day—move
earth; 3/day—power word stun; 2/day—antipathy, sympathy.
Caster level 18th; save DC 15 + spell level.
Spells: A dread linnorm can cast arcane spells as an
18th-level sorcerer (spells known 9/5/5/4/4/4/3/3/2/1;
spells/day 6/8/7/7/7/7/6/6/5/3; save DC 15 + spell level).
Immunities (Ex): In addition to sleep and paralysis
effects, a dread linnorm is immune to all spells of the
Enchantment school.
Feats: A creature that is flung by a dread linnorm after
being snatched travels 120 feet and takes 12d6 points of
damage. If the dread linnorm is flying, the creature takes
this damage or the appropriate falling damage, whichever
is greater.
CORPSE TEARER
This hideous beast is generally considered to be the worst of
a very bad lot. Characters who are lucky enough to
encounter the creature in one of its rare, agreeable moods
discover that it is knowledgeable about many ancient, magical mysteries. Whatever its initial mood, however, no meeting with it is likely to end without bloodshed unless the
intruders pay a staggering duty—and even that is no guarantee of safety.
A corpse tearer’s immense body is only a little shorter
than that of a dread linnorm, but it usually keeps itself in
a compact shape. Its scales are covered with slime, fungus,
moss, lichen, and tufts of branching cilia. When it is lying
still, a corpse tearer resembles an enormous, ancient,
fallen tree.
Corpse tearers adjust easily to any climate or terrain, but
they always make their homes beneath ancient burial
grounds. Their lairs are usually guarded by their undead
servants—everything from skeletons to very powerful
undead such as vampires and banshees. These creatures are
often the remains of adventurers who came looking for
treasure, or just unlucky travelers who wandered too near
the creature’s territory. When not on guard duty, these
undead tunnel into the ancient graves above the corpse
tearer’s lair in search of more gold, gems, and other treasures to increase its hoard.
Combat
A corpse tearer seldom fights in its lair becuase it prefers
that intruders never find its home. Instead, when a threat
draws near, it sends out undead minions to delay the
strangers and learn their weaknesses. Then, when it feels
that it has enough information about its foes, it takes to the
sky and attacks with its breath weapons and spells, crushing
or clawing paralyzed characters as the opportunity arises. It
falls back on teeth and claws only as a last resort.
Breath Weapon (Su): As a standard action, a corpse
tearer can breathe either paralysis or disease, each as
either a 60-foot cone or a 120-foot line. The paralysis
breath forces each living creature caught in its area to succeed at a Fortitude saving throw (DC 32) or be paralyzed
for 1d6+12 rounds. Every living creature caught in the
area of the corpse tearer’s disease breath must succeed at a
Fortitude save (DC 32) or contract linnorm fever. The
incubation period is 12 hours, and the disease deals 1d6
points of Strength damage and 1d3 points of Constitution
damage (see Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON
MASTER’s Guide).
Energy Drain (Su): Any living creature hit by a corpse
tearer’s claw gains one negative level. For each negative
level bestowed, the corpse tearer heals 5 points of damage.
If the amount of healing is more than the damage the creature has taken, it gains any excess as temporary hit points.
If the negative level has not been removed (with a spell
such as restoration) before 24 hours have passed, the
143
LINNORM144
afflicted opponent must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
28) to remove it. Failure means the opponent’s level (or
Hit Dice) is reduced by one.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—fly;
1/day—animate dead, control undead,
darkness, dimension door, enervation,
etherealness, polymorph self, protection
from good, speak with dead, spectral
hand, vampiric touch, water breathing. Caster level 15th; save DC
14 + spell level.
Spells: A corpse tearer can
cast divine spells as a 17thlevel cleric. It has access to
spells from the Destruction
and Evil domains (spells/day
6/7/6/6/6/5/4/3/2/1; save DC
15 + spell level.)
Feats: A creature that is flung
by a corpse tearer after being
snatched travels 110 feet and
takes 11d6 points of damage. If
the corpse tearer is flying, the
creature takes this damage or
the appropriate falling damage, whichever is greater.
LOXO
Large Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 5d8+5 (27 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 14 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Huge morningstar +8 melee and 2 slams +3
melee, or 2 slams +8 melee, or Large javelin +5 ranged
Damage: Huge morningstar 2d8+6, slam 1d6+2 (secondary) or 1d6+4 (primary), or Large javelin 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Berserk rage, trample 1d8+6
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft.
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +4
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 12, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +6, Listen +8, Spot +8, Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Warm plains
Organization: Solitary, pair, company (3–5), or herd
(20–40 plus 20% noncombatants plus 1–4 2nd-level
rangers, 1 2nd-level wizard, and 1 3rd–5th level ranger)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: By character class
Loxos are usually peaceful creatures, but they defend their
territories and families with great tenacity. They are among
the most dangerous of all desert dwellers to those who incur
their wrath.
A loxo appears to be a humanoid elephant. Its skin is
bluish-gray, wrinkled, and covered with rough, sparse
hair. It has thick, round limbs, flat feet, short, stubby fingers, and large ears. Its most striking feature is the pair of
trunks that grow from its face, framed by large tusks.
Each trunk is about 2 feet long and has three fingerlike
digits at the end. The typical loxo prefers simple, rustic
clothing, particularly cut from cloth patterned with circles or diamonds.
Loxos speak their own language and Common.
COMBAT
Loxos prefer melee to ranged combat, and they use thrown
weapons only when they can’t close with enemies. If a herd
is threatened, the adult male loxos charge intruders while
the females move the young to a defensible location. Once
the young are secure, the males make a fighting retreat
toward the females, so that they too can join the melee.
Berserk Rage (Ex): A loxo that sees a clan member
killed or incapacitated enters a berserk rage. For 6 rounds,
the loxo gains a +4 bonus to Strength, a +4 bonus to
Constitution, and a +2 morale bonus on Will saves, but
LOXOtakes a –2 penalty to Armor Class. The following changes
are in effect as long as the berserk rage lasts: HD 5d10+15
(37 hp); AC 12, touch 8, flat-footed 11; Atk +10 melee
(2d8+9, Huge morningstar) and +5 melee (2d6+3, 2
slams), or +10 melee (1d6+6, 2 slams), or +5 melee (1d8+6,
Large javelin); SA trample 1d8+9 (DC 18); SV Fort +4, Ref
+5, Will +6; Str 23, Con 17; Climb +8. After the berserk
rage ends, the loxo is fatigued (–2 penalty to Strength, –2
penalty to Constitution, can’t charge or run) until the end
of the encounter.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a loxo can trample Medium-size or smaller opponents. This attack deals 1d8+6 points of bludgeoning
damage. A trampled opponent can attempt either an
attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex save (DC
16) for half damage.
LOXO SOCIETY
Loxo herds are seminomadic. They move about, grazing
and harvesting fruits and nuts from groves of trees they
have planted. When they reach a grove or a good area for
grazing, they build temporary huts to serve as shelter
until it’s time to move on. Loxos need massive amounts of
grass and other vegetable material to fuel their big bodies.
When not eating, these creatures create rustic works of
art, which they barter for items
or tools they need.
Loxo herds are divided
into clans, and all members
of a clan wear the same
pattern of clothing. Each
herd has a chief (called
a lox-fithik, or herdlieutenant), who is a
ranger, and a tunnuk,
who has at least two
levels of wizard.
LOXO
CHARACTERS
A loxo’s preferred character class is ranger. Loxo
rangers choose favored
enemies from among the
most common threats to
their territories and habitats.
A loxo PC’s effective
character level (ECL) is
equal to its class level + 7; thus,
a 1st-level loxo ranger has an
ECL of 8 and is the equivalent
of an 8th-level character.
MARRASH
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil, Lawful)
Hit Dice: 7d8+7 (38 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft., fly 70 ft. (good)
AC: 19 (+3 Dex, +6 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 16
Attacks: 2 claws +8 melee and bite +3 melee, or mighty
composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) +10/+10 ranged
Damage: Claw 1d4+1, bite 1d6, mighty composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) 1d8+1/×3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Disease, double bowfire, taklif arrow
Special Qualities: Outsider traits, protection from
arrows, scent
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +8, Will +6
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 16, Con 13, Int 9, Wis 12, Cha 8
Skills: Balance +15, Jump +3, Listen +11, Search +8, Spot
+11, Tumble +13
Feats: Dodge, Point Blank Shot
Climate/Terrain: Warm jungle and desert
Organization: Solitary, pair, or flight (3–6)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard plus 1 taklif arrow
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 8–12 HD (Medium-size)
A marrash (plural marrashi) is a plague bearer that spreads
disease through combat.
Physically, a marrash resembles a winged
gnoll, except that it has birdlike talons on its
hands and feet and double-jointed, birdlike legs. It stands about 5 feet tall and
has a 10-foot wingspan. Occasionally
wizards or sorcerers summon marrashi to the Material Plane to act
as guards, assassins, or instruments of terror or revenge.
Every marrash carries a
longbow and a quiver of
arrows. About a third
of its arrows are vectors for disease; the
rest are normal except
for one—a magic taklif arrow. Any creature
hit by this arrow contracts a disease similar
to the marrash variant
of filth fever (see Disease,
below), except that the spirit
of a new marrash is generated
within the victim’s body. When the
infected creature dies, the marrash
spirit devours its soul over the next 1d6
days. Upon completing that process, the
145
MARRASH146
newborn marrash rises in the victim’s reconstituted corpse,
which assumes the form of a marrash.
Like most outer-planar beings, marrashi are not willing
servants for summoners. A marrash bound to serve a mortal
tries to use its taklif arrow on its master without the latter’s
knowledge, in the hope that the newborn marrash will
release its parent from bondage.
Marrashi speak Common and Infernal.
COMBAT
Marrashi consider themselves weak and vulnerable on the
ground, so they take to the air whenever possible.
Disease (Ex): Any creature hit by a marrash’s disease
arrow must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 14) or contract a
more virulent outer-planar version of filth fever. The incubation period is 1d3 days, and the disease deals 1d3 points of
Dexterity damage and 1d3 points of Constitution damage
(see Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
Each day thereafter that the disease lasts, the infected creature must also succeed at a second Fortitude save (DC 14), or
1 point each of that day’s Dexterity and Constitution
damage becomes Constitution drain instead.
Double Bowfire (Ex): In battle, a flying marrash grips
its longbow with its taloned feet and draws the string with
both hands. This unusual technique allows it to fire two
arrows nearly simultaneously at its highest attack bonus
as a full attack action.
Taklif Arrow: Any creature hit by a taklif arrow must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC 14) or contract a disease similar to the marrash variant of filth
fever (see Disease, above). The incubation period is 1 day, and the disease deals 1d3
points of Dexterity damage and 1d3 points
of Constitution damage (see Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON
MASTER’s Guide). However, a creature that fails any Fortitude saving
throw after its initial infection dies instantly, and neither raise dead nor resurrection can restore it to life.
The corpse rises as a new
marrash 1d6 days later.
Protection from Arrows (Sp):
A marrash can use protection
from arrows, as the spell, at
will. Caster level 10th.
Outsider Traits: A marrash has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be
raised or resurrected.
Scent (Ex): A marrash
can detect approaching enemies, sniff out hidden foes,
and track by sense of smell.
MEENLOCK
Tiny Aberration
Hit Dice: 4d8 (18 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 13 (+2 size, +1 Dex), touch 13, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 claws +3 melee
Damage: Claw 1d2–2
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Fear aura, meenlock transformation,
paralysis, rend mind
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., dimension door,
telepathy
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +2, Will +5
Abilities: Str 6, Dex 13, Con 10, Int 11, Wis 12, Cha 15
Skills: Hide +16, Listen +5, Move Silently +8, Spot +4,
Wilderness Lore +8
Feats: Track (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any subterranean, temperate forest
Organization: Brood (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always lawful evil
Advancement: 5–6 HD (Tiny); 7–8 HD (Small)
These dreadful, pitiful creatures were once humans,
dwarves, elves, gnomes, and halflings.
Through indescribable tortures, they
were transformed into the hideous
creatures known as meenlocks.
Now they themselves carry
on their forebears’ grisly
work, kidnapping travelers
and adventurers and inflicting
the same nightmarish metamorphosis upon them.
A meenlock is a grotesque,
twisted parody of a humanoid creature. It stands about
2 feet tall, but its body is
stooped and deformed, causing it to drag the hooked
claws that serve as its hands
on the ground. Its hide is
covered with shaggy spines
and painful ulcers.
Meenlocks shun the light,
so they excavate lairs deep
beneath remote forests. They
often create vast labyrinths of tunnels that connect subterranean caverns,
so that they can travel great distances without venturing
MEENLOCKaboveground. The entrances to meenlock lairs are expertly
camouflaged and sealed with flat stones. If the creatures
discover that one of their entrances has been tampered
with, they track down and capture the intruders to protect
their secrets.
Meenlocks communicate entirely through telepathy.
They can also grunt and click, but these sounds don’t constitute a language. Occasionally the creatures act as if
they are talking in order to conceal their telepathy ability
from enemies.
COMBAT
Meenlocks fight if forced to do so, but they are weak combatants. They prefer to pick off members of a group one at a
time over a long period. The first attack they usually launch
against their selected target is a slow mental assault (see
Rend Mind, below). Some meenlocks have been known to
stalk and harass their victims in this way for days.
Fear Aura (Su): As a free action, a meenlock can produce
a fear effect in a 30-foot-radius burst, centered on itself. Any
creature within the area that fails a Will save (DC 14)
becomes catatonic from fear for 1d4+4 rounds. During this
time, it rolls into a ball, hugs its knees, or simply stands in
place, shivering and staring. Any creature that makes a
saving throw against the effect cannot be affected again by
that meenlock’s fear aura for 24 hours.
Meenlock Transformation (Su): Meenlocks drag their
victims to their lairs and bind them to prevent their escape
before starting the transformation. (A captured creature may
be able to escape from its bonds and fight its way clear, but
the odds are against it, especially since the height of the
mazelike tunnels in a meenlock lair forces a Medium-size
creature to crawl on hands and knees.) Then three or more of
them gather around to touch each helpless humanoid or
monstrous humanoid. After 1d6 hours of such physical contact with the meenlocks, all of the subject’s ability scores fall
to 1 (except for any already at 0), reducing him or her to a
drooling, helpless state (no saving throw). A heal or greater
restoration spell at this point restores
the creature to normal. In another
1d6 hours, the transformation is
complete; the subject becomes forever a meenlock,
losing all of its previous
classes and abilities. At this
point, only a wish or miracle
spell can restore the victim.
Paralysis (Ex): Any creature hit by a meenlock’s claw
must make a Fortitude save
(DC 14) or be paralyzed for 3d6
rounds. The meenlocks use this
time to bind the paralyzed creature. Once bound, a typical human
can be carried by three meenlocks.
Rend Mind (Su): A meenlock can project thoughts and
suggestions into the mind of a single creature within 300 feet.
These thoughts are usually geared to cause paranoia—images
of stalking monsters or peering eyes, and the sensation of
being followed, watched, or sized up. The target of this mindaffecting phantasm must make a successful Will save (DC 14)
or take 1d4 points of Wisdom damage. Once a meenlock uses
this ability, it must wait 1d4 rounds before doing so again.
Dimension Door (Su): Once every 2 rounds, a meenlock
can produce an effect like that of a dimension door spell,
except that the range is only 60 feet and no additional
weight can be transported.
Telepathy (Ex): A meenlock can communicate through
telepathy with any other creature that has a language. This
communication has a range of 300 feet.
MEGALODON
Gargantuan Beast (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 24d10+168 (300 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: Swim 120 ft.
AC: 20 (–4 size, +2 Dex, +12 natural), touch 8, flatfooted 18
Attacks: Bite +24 melee
Damage: Bite 4d6+15
Space/Reach: 20 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, swallow whole
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., keen scent, low-light
vision
Saves: Fort +21, Ref +16, Will +9
Abilities: Str 31, Dex 15, Con 24, Int 1, Wis 12, Cha 10
Skills: Hide –10, Listen +6, Spot +6, Swim +18
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary or swarm (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 11
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement:
25–48 HD (Gargantuan); 49–72
HD (Colossal)
147
MEGALODON148
One of the largest predators in the world, a megalodon
defers to dragons and little else. Large enough to devour
an entire whale, the megalodon gives even hardened
sailors nightmares.
A megalodon is normally 55 to 65 feet long, and it weighs
between 10 to 60 tons. Rumors of individual megalodons
reaching a length of 80 to 90 feet cannot be confirmed.
COMBAT
Megalodons attack anything they perceive to be
edible—including each other. They can leap as high as
40 feet out of the water to snap at low-flying rocs
and small dragons. They bite with their powerful
jaws and can swallow smaller creatures.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a megalodon
hits an opponent that is at least one size
category smaller than itself with a bite
attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +40). If it gets a
hold, it can try to swallow on the next
round. Alternatively, the megalodon has
the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the
opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check,
but the megalodon is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A megalodon can swallow a
single creature that is at least one size category smaller
than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +40), provided it already has that opponent
in its mouth (see Improved Grab, above). Once
inside the megalodon, the opponent takes 2d8+10
points of bludgeoning damage plus 1d8+4 points of
acid damage per round from the megalodon’s gullet.
A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of the gullet and
return to the monster’s maw, where
another successful grapple check is needed
to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with either
claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing
at least 25 points of damage to the gullet (AC 20) in this
way creates an opening large enough to permit escape.
Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action
closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must
cut its own way out. A Gargantuan megalodon’s gullet can
hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128 Small or
smaller opponents.
Keen Scent (Ex): A megalodon notices creatures by
scent within a 180-foot radius and detects blood in the
water at a range of up to one mile.
MEGAPEDE
Colossal Vermin
Hit Dice: 32d8+256 (400 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: 80 ft., burrow 20 ft.
AC: 18 (–8 size, –2 Dex, +18 natural), touch 0, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 5 tentacle rakes +32 melee, or bite +32 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 2d8+16, bite 4d6+16 plus poison
Space/Reach: 15 ft. by 100 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison
Special Qualities: DR 25/+5, SR 31, tremorsense,
vermin traits
Saves: Fort +26, Ref +8, Will +11
Abilities: Str 43, Dex 7, Con 27, Int —, Wis 12, Cha 4
Skills: Listen +10, Spot +7
Climate/Terrain: Warm desert
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 20
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 33–64 HD (Colossal)
True terrors of the desert, megapedes constantly hunt the
dunes and sandy plains for food. The desert offers little
refuge to creatures fleeing these enormous predators.
A megapede looks like an enormous centipede with a long, segmented body and hundreds of pairs of legs. Its tough, bulbous
body is covered with dense orange and
brown bristles. The creature’s tremendous
mandibles twitch involuntarily when it
senses prey. A megapede can grow to
more than 100 feet in length.
COMBAT
Megapedes lie in wait just under the
sandy surface of the desert, lunging at
creatures who wander too near. In a
fight, a megapede usually rends its
enemy with five vicious claw attacks
per round. It reserves its poisonous bite for foes that prove especially daunting.
Poison (Ex): A megapede
delivers its poison (Fortitude save
DC 44) with each successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (2d6 points of Constitution
damage and 1d4 points of Dexterity drain).
Tremorsense (Ex): A megapede can automatically
sense the location of anything within 120 feet that is in contact with the ground.
Vermin Traits: A megapede is immune to all mind-affecting effects (charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns and
morale effects). It also has darkvision (60-foot range).
MEGAPEDEMOONBEAST
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 18d8+90 (171 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 10 ft.
AC: 17 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 10 tentacle rakes +21 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 4d6+10
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Bite 4d8+10, constrict 3d10+15, fear aura,
improved grab, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: All-around vision, darkvision 60 ft., SR 22
Saves: Fort +11, Ref +8, Will +12
Abilities: Str 30, Dex 15, Con 21, Int 8, Wis 9, Cha 18
Skills: Climb +26, Listen +20, Search +3, Spot +18
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Iron Will, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: 1/10th coins; 50% goods; 50% items plus 1
moonstone
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 19–27 HD (Huge); 28–36 HD (Gargantuan)
The moonbeast is a ferocious, tenacious, and thoroughly
horrifying adversary. Simply seeing one can send strong
adventurers fleeing for their lives, and actually fighting one is
a challenge beyond the capabilities of all but the most powerful heroes. Unfortunately, because of the monster’s ties to certain magic devices, some adventurers find themselves inadvertently (and often fatally) entangled with a moonbeast.
Since moonbeasts are active only at night and are usually
invisible, eyewitness descriptions of them tend to be hazy. In
reality, a moonbeast’s body is a roughly cylindrical mass of
squishy flesh, usually between 20 and 30 feet tall. Its height is
variable; even a single beast sometimes changes in size from
one appearance to the next. A moonbeast has no discernible
head, no front or back, and no top or bottom—it is equally
comfortable in any orientation. Its trunk is encircled at each
end by a ring of tentacles. Each ring has a number of tentacles equal to 1 + 1/2 the moonbeast’s Hit Dice, rounded
down. (Advanced moonbeasts may have more tentacles, and
thus more tentacle rake attacks, than the standard 18-HD
variety.) These tentacles are lined with barbs and hooks to
catch objects or prey, and they also serve as the moonbeast’s
means of locomotion. To move, the creature grabs fixed
objects with its tentacles and drags itself forward. Its body is
covered with a slick, oily substance. Four rings, each consisting of eight flexible, retractable, 1-foot-long eyestalks are
placed above and below each ring of tentacles.
In spite of its immense size, a moonbeast can squeeze its
soft body through an opening as small as a 5-by-5-foot
square. Wherever it passes, it leaves a telltale trail of glistening slime. Moonbeasts are invisible most of the time, but
their horrid smell and the noises they make almost constantly give away their presence to observant creatures.
COMBAT
A moonbeast uses its improved invisibility ability to remain
invisible even in combat. In battle, a moonbeast prefers to
strike, grab, and constrict. It can use as many as seven of its
tentacles against a single target.
Bite (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a moonbeast
can attempt to bite a grabbed opponent (+21 melee), dealing
4d8+5 points of slashing damage on a successful hit. A
moonbeast cannot use its bite attack against a creature it has
not already grabbed.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a moonbeast can crush a grabbed opponent, dealing 3d10+15 points
of bludgeoning damage.
Fear Aura (Su): A moonbeast continually emanates a fear
effect in a 60-foot-radius, centered on itself. Any creature
within the area that fails a Will save (DC 23) is paralyzed
with fear for 2d6 rounds. A new saving throw is required
each time a potentially affected creature comes within range
of the moonbeast.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a moonbeast hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a tentacle rake attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start
a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity (grapple bonus +31). If it gets a hold, it automatically constricts and can attempt to bite the grabbed opponent in the same round. Thereafter, the moonbeast has the
149
MOONBEAST150
option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use a
single tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the moonbeast is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals tentacle rake and
constrict damage and allows another bite attempt.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—dispel magic, fog cloud, improved
invisibility, lightning bolt; 1/day—chain lightning, cloudkill, disintegrate, Evard’s black tentacles, fireball, ice storm, mirror image,
summon monster VI. Caster level 18th; save DC 14 + spell level.
All-Around Vision (Ex): A moonbeast can see in all
directions at once. Because of this ability, it gains a +4 racial
bonus on Search and Spot checks, and it cannot be flanked.
MOONSTONES
In general, moonbeasts want nothing to do with the world.
They are content to hide in their remote lairs, dreaming of
their native homes (wherever those may be) and venturing out
only occasionally to catch a meal. But each of these creatures is
inseparably linked to a item called a moonstone—a rare and
unusual gem that resembles a pearl. Magic items and very
expensive pieces of jewelry occasionally contain moonstones.
Once in a creature’s possession, a moonstone slowly and
insidiously works its way into its owner’s psyche. After 1d6+3
weeks, the owner must succeed at a Will save (DC 30) or
become so attached to the item containing the moonstone
that he or she would refuse to relinquish it under any circumstances. In the course of
a campaign, this obsession
can go unrecognized for quite
a long time, and the owner may
not be consciously aware of it
until a situation arises that would
require separation from the item.
At some point, however, the
moonbeast that is linked to that
moonstone awakens, leaves its
lair, and begins tracking down
the gem. Its ultimate goal is to
recover the moonstone, slay the
owner, and then return to its lair.
Oddly, the monster seems to care
nothing for the moonstone
itself; it desires only that absolutely no one else possess it.
In fact, the moonbeast is
quite likely to abandon the
recovered moonstone item
somewhere during its
return trip. The object
may then lie forgotten
for years before another
unlucky adventurer discovers it anew and begins the
horrid cycle all over again.
MOONCALF
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 15d10+108 (190 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)
AC: 25 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +13 natural), touch 12, flatfooted 22
Attacks: 2 tentacle rakes +18 melee and 6 tentacle-arms
+13 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 2d6+4/19–20, tentacle-arm 1d6+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft. (30 ft. with tentacle rake)
Special Attacks: Bite 2d8+6, improved grab, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: Blindsight 100 ft., DR 10/+1, keen senses
Saves: Fort +16, Ref +14, Will +12
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 24, Int 21, Wis 21, Cha 11
Skills: Concentration +16, Hide +15, Knowledge (arcana)
+10, Knowledge (history) +10, Listen +15, Spot +19
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Expertise, Improved Critical
(tentacle rake), Improved Initiative, Improved Trip,
Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes, Toughness
Climate/Terrain: Any hills or mountains
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always neutral
evil
Advancement: 19–27 HD
(Huge); 28–60 HD (Gargantuan)
Mooncalves are otherworldly monstrosities that, according to rumor,
flew down to earth from the dark side
of the moon. When these creatures
“come to ground,” they never venture
farther down than mountaintops, the
tips of tall hills, and other high,
lonely, desolate places.
A mooncalf combines
the body of an immense
cephalopod with the wings
of a bat. It has six short
tentacle -arms that it uses
for close combat and two
long tentacles that it uses
to attack at a distance because of their 30-foot
reach. The creature’s beaklike mouth is located where
the tentacles meet.
Mooncalves do not speak, but they
can communicate telepathically with
any other creature within a 100-foot radius
that has a language.
MOONCALF
MDCOMBAT
Mooncalves prefer to fly high above their targets, striking at
foes from a distance with their spell-like abilities. In melee,
they may grab and crush opponents with their tentacles, or
drag foes into their slavering beaks, or command the elements to electrocute an enemy.
Bite (Ex): With each successful grapple check, a mooncalf automatically hits a grabbed opponent with its bite
attack, dealing 2d8+6 points of slashing damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a mooncalf hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with a tentacle rake attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +23). If it gets a hold, it automatically hits
with its bite attack on the same round. Thereafter, the
mooncalf has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
mooncalf is not considered grappled). In either
case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals tentacle rake and bite damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: 1/day—call lightning, control weather, control winds, dominate animal, greater
magic fang, protection from elements, quench, resist
elements. Caster level 9th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Blindsight (Ex): A mooncalf can ascertain its surroundings by nonvisual means (mostly hearing and
scent, but also by noticing vibration and other environmental clues). This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 100 feet. The
mooncalf usually does not need to make Spot or
Listen checks to notice creatures within range of
its blindsight.
Keen Senses (Ex): A mooncalf sees four times
as well a human in low-light conditions and twice
as well in normal light. It also has darkvision (100-
foot range).
MOONRAT
Tiny Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 1/4 d10 (1 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 15 ft., climb 15 ft.
AC: 14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), touch 14, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Bite +4 melee
Damage: Bite 1d3–4
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision,
lunar mind, scent, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +3
Abilities: Str 2, Dex 15, Con 11, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 2
Skills: Balance +10, Climb +10, Hide +16, Move Silently +8
Feats: Iron Will, Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Swarm (10–100)
Challenge Rating: 1/4
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always evil
Advancement: —
Moonrats are indistinguishable from
normal rats except in
moonlight. Lunar light
has an insidious effect on these creatures, making them
smarter, stronger, and
more ferocious than
any rat ought to be.
On nights when the
moon shines, moonrats pour out of their
darkened lairs to
soak up the pallid
rays and spread
terror throughout humanoid settlements.
COMBAT
Moonrats fight just
like normal rats do,
biting and tearing
with their teeth. Under
the influence of lunar
light, moonrats also gain the
ability to organize, converse with one
another, formulate complex plans, and
operate complicated devices. Their leaders
remember things done and learned nights or even months
before. When the moon’s light is at its peak, moonrats are
capable of making and acting on long-range plans that may
require dozens of full-moon nights to complete. These
schemes are often so subtle and involved that casual
observers do not connect incidents relating to a long-range
moonrat plan until it is too late to stop it.
Lunar Mind (Ex): A lunar modifier applies to a moonrat’s Strength and Intelligence scores while under the
influence of moonlight. The size of this modifier depends
on the amount of moonlight that reaches the moonrat,
according to the table below. On a clear night, the moonlight equivalent is the same as the actual phase of the
moon. On a night when clouds or heavy mist obscure the
moon, the moonlight equivalent is one or two steps (DM’s
choice) lower on the table than the actual moon phase. On
worlds with multiple moons, either choose only one moon
151
MOONRAT152
to influence the moonrats, or estimate the moonlight
equivalent of both moons on any given night, using the
new moon and full moon entries as the minimum and
maximum values, respectively, for that world.
Moonlight Equivalent Lunar Modifier
New Moon +0
Crescent +1
Quarter +2
Half +4
Gibbous +6
Full +8
For every 2 points of Strength increase, a moonrat gains a +1
bonus on attack and damage rolls. The effect of the Intelligence boost is open to considerable DM interpretation. Use
the Intelligence scores for the following creatures as benchmarks to determine the moonrats’ increased intellectual
capacity: Int 3 (minimum for a human), Int 6 (average for a
gargoyle), Int 8 (average for a centaur or gnoll), Int 9 (average for an orc), Int 10 (average for a goblin). No extra skill
points are gained for a lunar Intelligence boost.
Scent (Ex): A moonrat can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Because of its extraordinary
sense of smell, a moonrat retains its Dexterity bonus to AC
even when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked.
Skills: A moonrat receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide and
Move Silently checks and a +8 racial bonus on Balance
checks. It uses its Dexterity modifier for Climb checks.
MORKOTH
Medium-Size Aberration (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 7d8+7 (38 hp)
Initiative: +6
Speed: Swim 50 ft.
AC: 18 (+2 Dex, +6 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Bite +4 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8–1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Hypnosis
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., spell reflection
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +8
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 16, Wis 17, Cha 13
Skills: Hide +14, Knowledge (arcana) +10, Listen +13,
Spellcraft +10, Spot +13, Swim +7
Feats: Blind-Fight, Dodge, Improved Initiative, Skill Focus
(Hide)
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 8–14 HD (Medium-size); 15–21 HD (Large)
Few creatures of the deep enjoy reputations for cruelty and
hatred as extensive as that of the morkoth.
The top half of a morkoth resembles a deep-sea fish
with bulging eyes, protruding teeth and a saillike fin
along its back. Its lower body resembles that of an octopus in that it has eight tentacles, but the creature also
sports limbs like the legs of a crustacean. Occasionally a
morkoth has a squidlike beak instead of a mouth, but the
typical version just has a maw like that of a fish.
A morkoth lives a solitary existence, spending most of its
days inside a maze of tunnels constructed of rock or coral at
the bottom of the sea. The outer part of a morkoth’s lair usually
consists of six tunnels, all spiraling outward, crisscrossing and
interconnecting with one another in a bewildering pattern.
The creature’s actual home is at the center of this maze.
A morkoth uses a variety of lures to draw prey into its
clutches. It may dangle treasure as a prize, but its hypnosis
ability is the most powerful lure at its disposal. Once in a
morkoth’s clutches, a victim doesn’t usually survive for long,
since these creatures are interested in capturing only food,
not slaves or captives. A morkoth has little interest in treasure except as a lure for prospective victims.
COMBAT
A morkoth’s bite is its only offensive weapon. Normally it
uses its hypnosis ability to lure a passing creature through its
MORKOTHmaze, then devours its prey alive. The morkoth is a cautious
monster, so it chooses its victims carefully. Typically, it
tries to lure the last in a group of passing creatures into its
tunnel, hoping that the others won’t notice that one’s
absence until it is too late.
Hypnosis (Su): Any creature passing within 20 feet of
the entrance to a morkoth’s lair must make a successful
Will saving throw (DC 14) or be hypnotized. A hypnotized creature moves unerringly through the maze at its
usual speed. Once in center of the lair, the affected creature floats quietly in a trance, waiting to be devoured at
the morkoth’s leisure. A hypnotized creature is helpless
against the morkoth’s attacks but may attempt a new
saving throw at the same DC each round that the morkoth
attacks it.
A morkoth can hypnotize any number of creatures at one
time. When it is outside its lair, this ability has a range of 20
feet. Hypnosis is a mind-affecting compulsion effect.
Spell Reflection (Su): The morkoth has a special type of
spell resistance that causes the effect of any spell, spell-like
ability, or magic item that it successfully resists (even those
that affect areas) to bounce off and reflect back at the caster.
If the caster of a spell or the user of a spell-like ability or
magic item fails a caster level check (DC 15), he or she
becomes either the spell’s target or the point of origin for
the spell’s effect, as appropriate. If the morkoth is the subject of a dispel magic spell that is not reflected, its spell
reflection ability is suppressed for 1 round.
MORKOTH TUNNELS
A creature that has successfully resisted the morkoth’s hypnosis ability might try to rescue a friend who was drawn
into the tunnels. The passages of a morkoth’s lair are so
narrow that only one Medium-size character can swim
through any 5-foot section at a time. An ambitious DM
could map out the mazelike tunnel system and allow the
characters to try to work their way through it.
Alternatively, the DM could handle penetration of the lair
abstractly as follows: Roll 2d6 to determine the number of
intersections between the tunnel’s entrance and the
morkoth’s lair, allowing 10 to 40 feet between intersections.
At each intersection, have the lead character make an Intuit
Direction check (DC 15) to discern the correct path. Each
correct choice brings the group one intersection closer to
the lair; each incorrect choice adds 1d6 intersections to the
route and an equal number of rounds to the time needed to
complete the trip.
It is always possible to navigate any labyrinth by simply
choosing one wall and following wherever it goes. A creature using this method can eventually find the morkoth’s
chamber without error, but this route is usually not the
shortest possible path. Roll 1d6+6 for the number of intersections the rescuers must traverse using this method.
MUDMAW
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 8d10+24 (68 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 20 ft., swim 30 ft.
AC: 17 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flatfooted 16
Attacks: 2 tentacle rakes +11 melee and bite +6 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 1d6+4, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 2d8+6, improved grab, spelllike abilities, trample 2d6+6
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 10/+1, low-light
vision, scent, SR 18
Saves: Fort +9, Ref +7, Will +5
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 12, Con 17, Int 3, Wis 12, Cha 16
Skills: Hide +7*, Swim +12, Wilderness Lore +3
Feats: Improved Initiative, Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Warm marsh
Organization: Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 9–16 HD (Large); 17–24 HD (Huge)
Mudmaws wait just below the surface of the water in
swamps, slow rivers, and lakes for potential prey to come
down to the water and drink. In this state, this carnivorous
ambush predator resembles a floating log—a fact that many
an unwary adventurer has discovered.
This fearsome swamp predator resembles a crocodile
with a rubbery green tentacle growing from each corner
of its mouth. Its immense maw is filled with needle -
sharp teeth.
Mudmaws are intensely territorial; they have been
known to attack even other mudmaws that intrude on the
areas they claim. If some disaster makes more meat available than any one of them could eat, they allow others of
their kind to share the bounty and then leave again. If two
mudmaws are encountered, they are peacefully courting
and preparing to mate.
COMBAT
A mudmaw typically tries to grab creatures two or more size
categories smaller than itself with its tentacles and drag
them under the water to drown. Against larger creatures
within 40 feet, it uses slow, then lunges from the water at a
full charge, trampling its prey before grabbing it and returning to the water. A mudmaw doesn’t attack if it can’t reach its
prey with its tentacles or with a single 40-foot charge. Larger
creatures, or those that prove to be a threat, find pursuing
the monster difficult because it uses soften earth and stone to
turn the edge of the water into a quagmire, then swims away
or uses water walk to cross it.
153
MUDMAW154
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a
mudmaw can crush a grabbed opponent, dealing 2d8+6
points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a mudmaw hits an opponent
that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a
tentacle rake attack, it deals normal damage and attempts
to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +24, including +8
racial bonus on grapple checks). If it gets a hold, it also
constricts in the same round. Thereafter, the mudmaw
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use its tentacle to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on
grapple check, but the mudmaw is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals tentacle
rake damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—slow, soften earth and stone,
water walk. Caster level 5th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a mudmaw can trample opponents at least one size
category smaller than itself. This attack deals 2d6+6 points
of bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 18) for half damage.
Scent (Ex): A mudmaw can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
Skills: *A mudmaw receives a +20 bonus on Hide checks
when in water.
MYCONID
These intelligent, mobile mushroms are among the more
unusual creatures that live deep below ground. Myconids
(also called fungus ones) are gentle, quiet, shy, and thoughtful.
They always view outsiders with distrust because they assume
that all strangers are destructive and violent. To ensure that
they can live in peace, they usually make their homes far from
the more commonly traveled subterranean paths.
A myconid can be from 2 to 12 feet tall. The primary physical characteristics that distinguish it from other giant toadstools are its limbs—the lower half of its trunk is split in
half to form two legs, and two arms depend from just below
its “cap.” It also has two eyes in the cap, which are perfectly
concealed when it closes them. Its hands seem to have
random numbers of fingers and thumbs. Occasionally, an
individual with more than two arms or legs pops up.
A myconid has a life span of about twenty-four years.
When first spawned, an infant resembles a giant toadstool.
At the age of four, it reaches adulthood and becomes mobile.
Thereafter, its appearance changes very little as it ages.
COMBAT
The fungus ones hide from strangers and fight only as a last
resort. When forced into combat, a myconid releases spores
as a ranged attack or uses its slams in melee.
Spores (Ex): As a standard action, a myconid can release a cloud of spores. These
spores come in several different varieties, as
described below. As it enters each new stage of
life (increasing its Hit Dice by 1), a myconid
gains a new variety of spore but does not lose
access to the previous varieties. Each type of spore
can be used a number of times per day equal
to the myconid’s Hit Dice. A 3-HD
myconid, for example, has the
first three spores (distress, reproduction, and rapport), and it can use each
variety three times per day. Spores can be
released either in a 120-foot spread or as a
40-foot ray against a single target, as
noted in the individual spore descriptions.
Distress: These spores alert all other
myconids within the area that danger is
near. They are released in a 120-foot spread.
Reproduction: These spores eventually germinate into new infant myconids. They are released as a 120-foot
spread and have no detrimental effects
on nonmyconids.
Rapport: Myconids do not speak, but
these spores enable them to establish
telepathic communication with each other
and with outsiders. A successful Fortitude saving
throw (DC varies; see individual descriptions) negates the
effect, but it is harmless. Rapport lasts for 30 to 60 minutes
MYCONID
MCwith outsiders, but for 8 hours with other myconids. Rapport
spores can be released as either a 120-foot spread or a 40-foot
ray. Regardless of the release area, the communication range
is 120 feet once rapport is established.
Pacification: These spores are released as a 40-foot ray. The
target must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC varies; see
individual descriptions) or become passive for 1 minute.
Being passive is similar to being dazed, except that the target
can take partial actions that don’t involve attacking. This is a
mind-affecting compulsion effect.
Hallucination: These spores are released as a 40-foot ray.
The target must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC varies;
see individual descriptions) or suffer powerful hallucinations that duplicate the effects of a confusion spell for 1 hour.
Animation: Only the myconid sovereign has access to these
spores. When released over a dead body, animation spores
begin a process that covers the corpse with purple fungus.
After 1d4 days, the corpse reanimates as a servant. A servant
has all the characteristics of a zombie of the same size, except
that it retains its previous creature type and it cannot be
turned or otherwise affected as an undead. Over the course of
1d6 weeks, a myconid-animated corpse slowly decays. At the
end of that period it simply disintegrates into dust.
Plant Traits (Ex): A myconid is immune to poison, sleep,
paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to
critical hits or mind-affecting effects. The creature also has
low-light vision.
Skills and Feats: A myconid gains skills and feats as
though it were a fey. A myconid of any kind has EHD as
though it were a Tiny plant.
JUNIOR WORKERS
These youngsters are four to eight years old. They assist
their elders with daily chores and serve as a circle’s first line
of defense.
Combat
Junior workers are ineffective fighters. They release their
spores at the first sign of danger and hide or retreat if threatened. If forced to fight, they tend to rush a single opponent
as a group. Because a junior worker has a reach of 0 feet, it
must enter an opponent’s space to make melee attacks.
Spores (Ex): Junior workers have access only to distress
spores.
AVERAGE WORKER
These myconids are eight to twelve years old. They are the
backbone of the community, and they can perform a wide
variety of tasks.
155
MYCONID
Myconid Junior Worker Myconid Average Worker Myconid Elder Worker
Tiny Plant Small Plant Medium-Size Plant
Hit Dice: 1d8 (4 hp) 2d8+2 (11 hp) 3d8+3 (16 hp)
Initiative: +2 +2 +1
Speed: 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), 13 (+1 size, +2 Dex), 12 (+1 Dex, +1 natural),
touch 14, flat-footed 12 touch 13, flat-footed 11 touch 11, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 slams +1 melee 2 slams +2 melee 2 slams +3 melee, or spores +3
ranged touch
Damage: Slam 1d3–1 Slam 1d4 Slam 1d6+1
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: — — Spores
Special Qualities: Plant traits, spores Plant traits, spores Plant traits, spores
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +2, Will +1 Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +1 Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +3
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 15, Con 11, Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Str 12, Dex 13, Con 13,
Int 9, Wis 12, Cha 12 Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 13 Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Craft (any one) +2, Hide +13, Craft (any one) +4, Hide +10, Craft (any one) +4, Hide +5,
Knowledge (nature) +2, Listen Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen +6, Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen
+6, Move Silently +5, Profession Move Silently +5, Profession +8, Move Silently +4, Profession
(farmer) +4, Sense Motive +4, (farmer) +5, Sense Motive +4, (farmer) +6, Sense Motive +5,
Spot +6, Wilderness Lore +4 Spot +6, Wilderness Lore +5 Spot +8, Wilderness Lore +6
Feats: Alertness Alertness Alertness
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 1/2 1 2
Treasure: None None None
Alignment: Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral
Advancement: — — —156
Combat
Average workers are fairly proficient fighters. If alerted to
danger, they usually try to hide and then either attack from
ambush or wait until more capable myconids arrive on the
scene. If such reinforcements are available, the average workers
use the aid another action to assist their superiors in combat.
Spores (Ex): Average workers have access to both distress
and reproduction spores.
ELDER WORKER
These myconids are twelve to sixteen years old. They serve as
supervisors for other workers and as shock troops in combat.
Combat
Elder workers usually spray intruders with rapport spores
rather than hiding, as more junior myconids do. They are
quite willing to communicate rather than take aggressive
action. If forced to fight, they try to eliminate the most formidable-looking foes first. If more capable myconids join
the battle, elder workers use much the same tactics that
average workers do.
Spores (Ex): Elder workers have access to distress, reproduction, and rapport spores (save DC 12 where applicable).
GUARD
These myconids are sixteen to twenty years old. They are
charged with the defense of the circle.
Combat
Guards are fairly aggressive in combat, at least by myconid standards. Their preferred attack is their pacification spores, though
they can use their slam attacks if forced into melee.
MYCONID
Myconid Guard Myconid Circle Leader Myconid Sovereign
Medium-Size Plant Large Plant Large Plant
Hit Dice: 4d8+8 (26 hp) 5d8+15 (37 hp) 6d8+21 (48 hp)
Initiative: +1 +1 +1
Speed: 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 12 (+1 Dex, +1 natural), 12 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +2 natural), 12 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +2 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 11 touch 10, flat-footed 11 touch 10, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 2 slams +5 melee, or spores 2 slams +5 melee, or spores 2 slams +7 melee, or spores
+5 ranged touch +6 ranged touch +8 ranged touch
Damage: Slam 1d6+2 Slam 1d8+3 Slam 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Spores Spores Spores
Special Qualities: Plant traits, spores Plant traits, spores Plant traits, potion making, spores
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +2, Will +3 Fort +7, Ref +2, Will +4 Fort +8, Ref +3, Will +5
Abilities: Str 14, Dex 12, Con 15, Str 16, Dex 12, Con 17, Str 18, Dex 12, Con 17,
Int 11, Wis 15, Cha 14 Int 11, Wis 16, Cha 15 Int 12, Wis 17, Cha 17
Skills: Craft (any one) +4, Hide +5, Craft (any one) +4, Diplomacy Craft (any one) +5, Diplomacy
Intimidate +6, Knowledge +4, Hide +1, Intimidate +6, +5, Hide +1, Intimidate +8,
(nature) +4, Listen +8, Move Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen Knowledge (nature) +5, Listen
Silently +4, Profession (farmer) +9, Move Silently +4, Profession +9, Move Silently +4, Profession
+6, Sense Motive +6, Spot +8, (farmer) +8, Sense Motive +8, (farmer) +8, Profession
Wilderness Lore +6 Spot +9, Wilderness Lore +7 (herbalist) +7, Sense Motive +8,
Spot +9, Wilderness Lore +7
Feats: Alertness Alertness, Alertness, Brew Potion (B),
Weapon Focus (spores) Toughness, Weapon Focus
(spores)
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, patrol (3–5), Solitary, pair, patrol (3–5), work Tribe (3–10 circles, plus
or work gang (3–5 plus 3–5 gang (3–5 plus 3–5 workers), 1 king and 5–10 zombie
workers) or circle (4 junior workers plus servants)
average workers, elder workers,
guards, and elder guards, for a total of 20)
Challenge Rating: 4 6 7
Treasure: None None No coins, no goods, standard
items (potions only)
Alignment: Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral Usually lawful neutral
Advancement: — — 7–12 HD (Large); 13–18 HD (Huge)Spores (Ex): Guards have
access to distress, reproduction, rapport, and pacification spores (save DC 14
where applicable).
CIRCLE LEADER
These myconids are twenty
to twenty-four years old. As
the name suggests, they lead
and administer their circles.
Combat
Circle leaders join battle
only if doing so seems necessary to keep their underlings from being slaughtered. In combat, they use
their hallucination spores at
the first opportunity. Like
other myconids, they prefer
to avoid melee combat altogether but can use their
slams if they must.
Spores (Ex): Circle leaders have access to distress, reproduction, rapport, pacification,
and hallucination spores (save DC 15 where applicable).
SOVEREIGN
A myconid sovereign is usually at least twenty-four years
old. It rules over a tribe, advised by the oldest of the circle
leaders. Sovereigns in neighboring areas try to ensure regular communication between their tribes, and they occasionally meet to discuss issues that affect multiple tribes.
Combat
Sovereigns use the same tactics as circle leaders, except that
they also usually have a few myconid-animated zombies, or
servants, to order into combat. If they join combat at all,
sovereigns tend to advance on the enemy behind a rank of
servants or circle leaders or both.
Spores (Ex): A myconid sovereign has access to distress,
reproduction, rapport, pacification, hallucination, and animation spores (save DC 15 where applicable).
Potion Making (Su): Though it is not a spellcaster, a
myconid sovereign can create various potions that mimic
cleric and druid spells. It can duplicate the following
effects, each once per day (but only for the purpose of
brewing potions): bull’s strength, cure light wounds, cure moderate wounds, cure serious wounds, delay poison, endurance,
endure elements, greater magic fang, invisibility to animals, lesser
restoration, magic fang, negative energy protection, neutralize
poison, protection from elements, remove blindness/deafness,
remove disease, remove paralysis, resist elements. Caster level
6th; save DC 12 + spell level.
MYCONID SOCIETY
A circle of myconids contains equal numbers of 1-HD, 2-
HD, 3-HD, 4-HD, and 5-HD individuals. Each day is rigidly
structured into 8 hours of rest, 8 hours of work (tending
fungus farms), and 8 hours of melding into a transcendental, hallucinogenic, group-mind state. A melding can be
broken only by myconid distress spores.
Myconids grow fungus for food. A tribe usually maintains several fungus farms, which the workers tend with an
almost religious zeal. These creatures know everything
there is to know about fungus, including the optimum conditions for growing each type, and how large a crop a given
area might be expected to produce. Myconids also know
how to make various items from fungus. Most of these,
however, are useful only to myconids.
Myconid tribes consist of several circles living in close
proximity. The circles in a tribe usually arrange themselves
so that the distress spores from neighboring circles can
reach at least one member of another circle in the tribe.
A myconid encountered away from its circle is performing some mission for its superiors. Such missions usually
consist of keeping a lookout for intruders or scavenging
for refuse to fertilize the fungus beds. Should a wandering
myconid chance upon a humanoid body suitable for animation, it takes that back to its circle.
The sovereign is the only 6-HD myconid in a tribe. This
creature organizes the circles, watches over the tribe, protects it from outside influences, animates guardians, and
brews potions. When it dies, the oldest surviving circle
leader in that tribe becomes the new sovereign.
157
MYCONID158
NEEDLEFOLK
Medium-Size Plant
Hit Dice: 3d8+3 (16 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 14 (+4 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Needles +2 ranged, or 2 claws +3 melee
Damage: Needles 1d12+1, claw 1d4+1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: Plant traits
Saves: Fort +4, Ref +1, Will +3
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 15,
Cha 5
Skills: Hide +0*
Climate/Terrain: Any forest
Organization: Solitary or grove (5–50)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Medium-size)
Though needlefolk superficially resemble humanoids,
they are in fact mobile plants. Because they lack roots,
needlefolk must take in water and nutrients through a
structure that resembles a mouth.
Under most circumstances a needlefolk’s movements are
slow and stately. When
faced with danger, however, it can be nearly as quick and agile as a human.
A needlefolk is a green, hairless bipedal creature whose body
is covered with short, stiff bristles (actually needlelike thorns).
In human terms, its body is quite thin, even emaciated-looking.
Its arms end in “hands” that sport vicious-looking claws (actually large, sturdy thorns). The coloration of the small leaves
that cover the monster’s body mirrors that of the foliage
around them: green in spring and summer, red and yellow in
autumn, and brown in winter. Needlefolk are deciduous, so
they drop their leaves and become dormant through the cold
season. A dormant needlefolk resembles a tree with two
branches and a faint outline of a face in the bark atop its body.
Needlefolk have no appreciable society or culture. They
live in the forest with no more social organization than trees
or shrubs would have. Their dietary needs are all satisfied by
absorbing light and by eating dirt, decaying leaves, and the
occasional small, dead forest animal. They reproduce by
seeds, which each needlefolk produces in the autumn. The
seed pods are brown and covered with spiny thorns. Because
they fall close to the parent plant, groves of needlefolk tend
to spring up wherever one has chosen to spend a season.
The only thing that excites needlefolk is elves—they hate
elves passionately. Needlefolk can sense the presence of an
elf within 1,500 feet, and they always move to attack when
one is detected. However, the monsters do possess enough
intelligence and cunning not to commit suicide if they can see
that the odds are strongly against them. If badly outnumbered,
a needlefolk may shadow the target elves until it can
see that enough additional needlefolk have gathered
in the area to shift the balance against the enemies.
Needlefolk speak Sylvan.
COMBAT
Needlefolk are not tremendous fighters at
close range; their preferred weapon
is the small needles that cover their
bodies. Each round, a needlefolk can
launch a cluster of needles from its body
(range increment 20 feet, maximum range
200 feet). The precise number of needles
launched doesn’t matter; either they all hit a
single target as a cluster and deal 1d12+1
points of damage, or they all miss. If forced into
melee, a needlefolk attacks with its claws.
Groups of needlefolk attack as individuals,
without any sort of plan or direction. Each one is
cunning enough to determine where its own
attacks might be best targeted, but it cares
nothing for what the rest of its kind do in a fight.
Plant Traits (Ex): Needlefolk are immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. They are not
subject to critical hits or mind-affecting effects. The
creatures also have low-light vision.
Skills: *A needlefolk’s coloration and needles give
it excellent camouflage in the forest. While there,
it has a +16 racial bonus on Hide checks when stationary. This bonus drops to +8 if it moves at up to half-speed.
NEOGI
Neogis are vicious, spiderlike scavengers, raiders, and slavers.
They fit right into any setting where creepy creatures abound.
A neogi’s eight-legged body is covered with stiff hair,
which makes it look something like a giant wolf spider.
Instead of a spider’s head, however, the neogi has a long,
flexible neck that extends upward and backward, then turns
toward the front again in a large S-curve. Atop that sleek
neck sits a small, narrow head, like that of an eel. Its jaws are
lined with tiny, needle-sharp teeth, and small, black eyes are
pushed well forward on the face. An occasional individual
has a narrow beard growing from the front edge of its chin.
The typical neogi dyes its naturally tan fur in one of many
different hues and patterns. Some of these patterns signify
family or rank; others are just for decoration. A neogi usually wears simple articles of decorative clothing and a belt
or bandoleer with pouches for carrying its valuables.
Neogi lairs are usually laced with pits, chasms, narrow
bridges, and precarious ledges. With their excellent balance
and jumping skills and their ability to dash around enemies,
neogis can move through these hazardous areas more
quickly and safely than most attackers can.
NEEDLEFOLK
TDAll neogis speak Common and Undercommon, and a
large number of them also speak Terran.
COMBAT
The tactics of these monsters vary according to the kind of
neogi involved. No neogi is particularly brave, but all of
them are ruthless. They all share the following abilities.
Poison (Ex): Neogi poison is exceptionally virulent, considering that the creature itself is so frail. A neogi delivers
its poison (Fortitude save DC 14 for all neogis) with each
successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is
the same (1d4 points of Wisdom damage).
Immune to Mind-Affecting Effects: Neogis are
immune to all mind-affecting effects.
Skills: A neogi uses its Dexterity score instead of its
Strength score for Climb and Jump checks.
SPAWN
These foul and dangerous pests usually are found only in the
vicinity of a great old master. Sometimes, however, adult
neogis let large numbers of spawn loose on the outskirts of
their community and leave them to fend for themselves.
Combat
Neogi spawn usually prey on each other, but if they notice
other prey, they charge toward it. In combat, they swarm
over a single creature, biting until it succumbs to their
poison. Thereafter, these little horrors devour their prey.
ADULT NEOGI
Adult neogis are the backbone of the community. They
spend most of their time trying to acquire as much wealth
and power as possible.
Combat
Adult neogis are not tremendous fighters, and they know it.
Wherever possible, they have their umber hulk slaves (see
Neogi Society, below) fight for them while they linger
nearby looking for opportunities to use their enslave ability.
Adult neogis often try to make foes more vulnerable to
159
NEOGI
Neogi Spawn Adult Neogi Great Old Master Neogi
Tiny Aberration Small Aberration Huge Vermin
Hit Dice: 1/4 d8–1 (1 hp) 5d8–5 (18 hp) 5d8+25 (47 hp)
Initiative: +3 +3 –1
Speed: 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 30 ft., climb 20 ft. 20 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 size, +3 Dex), 17 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), 10 (–2 size, –1 Dex, +3 natural),
touch 15, flat-footed 12 touch 14, flat-footed 14 touch 7, flat-footed 10
Attacks: Bite +5 melee Bite +7 melee and 2 claws –3 melee, Bite +1 melee
or light crossbow +7 ranged
Damage: Bite 1d3–4 plus poison Bite 1d6–2 , claw 1d3–2, Bite 1d6
light crossbow 1d8/19–20
Space/Reach: 2 /2 ft by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison Enslave, poison Poison, spit spawn
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., immune Darkvision 60 ft., immune Vermin traits
to mind-affecting effects to mind-affecting effects
Saves: Fort –1, Ref +3, Will +2 Fort +0, Ref +4, Will +6 Fort +9, Ref +0, Will +3
Abilities: Str 3, Dex 17, Con 9 Str 6, Dex 17, Con 9 Str 11, Dex 8, Con 20
Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 2 Int 15, Wis 14, Cha 16 Int —, Wis 15, Cha 1
Skills: Balance +4, Climb +11, Balance +11, Climb +11, Disable Balance +3, Move Silently +7
Jump +4, Move Silently +5 Device +10, Intimidate +9,
Jump +11, Move Silently +11
Feats: Weapon Finesse (bite) (B) Dodge, Mobility, Simple Weapon —
Proficiency, Weapon Finesse (bite) (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate or warm land Any temperate or warm land Any temperate or warm land
and underground and underground and underground
Organization: Swarm (10–40) or tribe Nest (3–8 plus 3–8 umber Tribe (1 plus 10–60 spawn,
(10–60 plus 10–60 adult hulk slaves) 10–60 adult neogi, and 10–60
neogi, 10–60 umber hulk umber hulk slaves)
slaves, and 1 great old master)
Challenge Rating: 1/4 4 6
Treasure: None Double standard None
Alignment: Usually lawful evil Usually lawful evil Always neutral
Advancement: — By character class —160
enslavement by using their poison first, usually delivered
via a crossbow bolt (see below). These creatures are nimble
and difficult to corner.
Poison (Ex): As a standard action, an adult neogi can coat
a weapon with poison from its fangs. The poison remains
active for 1 minute after application and functions as it does
when delivered by means of a bite.
Enslave (Su): Three times a day, a neogi can attempt to enslave any one living creature within 30 feet. This ability functions similarly to a dominate monster spell (caster level 16th;
Will save DC 15). An enslaved creature obeys the neogi’s telepathic commands to the letter. The subject can attempt a new
Will save (DC 15) every 24 hours to break free. Otherwise,
the neogi’s control is broken only by the death of
either the neogi or the enslaved creature,
or by a remove curse or dispel magic effect,
or if the neogi travels more than 1 mile
from the enslaved creature.
This ability is not needed for neogis
to subdue or control their umber hulk
slaves (see Neogi Society, below).
GREAT OLD MASTER
A neogi that has grown old and
senile is used as an incubator for
infant neogi. In preparation for
this event, adult neogis exude
a fluid and inject it into the
subject. This fluid causes
the subject’s body to swell
into a 10-foot-diameter, bloated sack.
Upon becoming a great old master, a neogi
loses its intellect, memories, feats, magical abilities, and most
skills. Its type changes to vermin. When the transformation is
complete, adult neogis lay their eggs in the great old master’s
abdomen. Thereafter, the adult neogis provide the great old
master with food—usually alive but immobilized—to sustain
it and nourish the embryos that are devouring their host from
the inside out. Eventually, twenty to forty neogi spawn chew
their way out of the dying master. Most of these are in turn
eaten by their voracious, newborn brothers and sisters, but a
few survive to become the next generation of adult neogis.
Combat
A great old master can do little in combat except lurch
about, biting and spewing forth spawn.
Spit Spawn (Ex): As a standard action, a great old master
can spit out 2d4 spawn, which can attack the moment they
land. The great old master can place the spawn anywhere
within a range of 100 feet, but no two spawn can land more
than 30 feet apart.
Also, when a great old master takes damage, it can release
2d4 spawn. This version of the spit spawn ability is usable
once per round as a free action.
Vermin Traits: A great old master is immune to all mindaffecting effects (charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns,
and morale effects). It also has darkvision (60-foot range).
NEOGI SOCIETY
There’s nothing to admire about neogi culture. These creatures
are vicious murderers, plunderers, and slavers.
Perhaps they kill to eat and enslave whatever is left over, or maybe they fill their
chain gangs with slaves and eat whatever
is left over. Either way, their rapacity has
made them the enemies of every thinking
race in the world. Only the mind flayers are
known to have dealings with neogis, usually over the buying and selling of slaves.
Of all the races that neogis enslave,
umber hulks are their favorites. Every neogi
possesses at least one umber hulk, raised
from birth to a life of slavery and conditioned to accept that situation as the natural order. These umber hulk slaves take
orders from any neogi without question or
thought. Umber hulk guards keep less compliant slaves (those under the effect of the
neogi’s enalave ability) under control and also act as soldiers in
neogi armies and slave raids.
In the neogis’ worldview,
ownership is what fuels the universe. Everything belongs to the
neogis as a whole—if not now, then
it did in the past or it will in the
future. Even a neogi can be owned as a slave by another neogi,
and the slaves can own property and slaves, and those slaves
can own property and other slaves, and so on.
NEOGI CHARACTERS
Many neogis become wizards or sorcerers. A neogi’s favored
class is sorcerer.
A neogi PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its
class level + 8. Thus, a 1st-level neogi sorcerer has an ECL
of 9 and is the equivalent of a 9th-level character.
NETHERSIGHT MASTIFF
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+30 (85 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 15 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
Attacks: Bite +13 melee
Damage: Bite 2d6+6
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, wrenching attack
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., ethereal bite, lowlight vision, scent, true sight
NETHERSIGHT
MASTIFF
MCSaves: Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +6
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 12
Skills: Jump +9, Listen +9, Spot +8*, Wilderness Lore +5
Feats: Alertness, Improved Initiative, Iron Will
Climate/Terrain: Any cold or temperate land
Organization: Solitary or pack (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 8
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–30 HD (Huge)
Nethersight mastiffs are fierce predators native to arctic and
subarctic areas of the Material Plane. These imposing, muscular canines have a taste for ethereal flesh, and they pursue
it zealously, often passing over easier Material Plane prey in
favor of a hunt on the Ethereal Plane.
A nethersight mastiff resembles a tremendous dire wolf
with a black, shaggy coat and huge paws. It has a broad head
with a short, wide muzzle, and its teeth glow with a pearly
blue light. The typical nethersight mastiff is 8 feet in length
and weighs 700 pounds.
Nethersight mastiffs speak Common.
COMBAT
Nethersight mastiffs are bold, aggressive carnivores that
usually hunt in large packs, surrounding their prey to prevent
escape, and then closing in for the kill. Because ethereal
prey is more difficult to catch than Material Plane creatures,
mastiffs always attack quickly and
hold on with their jaws.
Improved Grab (Ex):
If a nethersight mastiff hits
an opponent that is at
least one size category
smaller than itself
with a bite attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to
start a grapple as a
free action without provoking
an attack of
opportunity
(grapple bonus +18). If it gets a hold on an ethereal creature,
it can attempt a wrenching attack on the next round. Alternatively, the nethersight mastiff has the option to conduct
the grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the
opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the nethersight mastiff is not considered grappled). In either case,
each successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Wrenching Attack (Su): A nethersight mastiff can
wrench a grabbed ethereal opponent onto the Material
Plane by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus
+18). A wrenched opponent is then trapped on the Material
Plane unless it has the means to return to the Ethereal Plane.
Ethereal Bite (Su): A nethersight mastiff ’s teeth have
abilities similar to those of a ghost touch weapon, allowing it
to bite ethereal creatures and negating the usual miss
chance on any attack against an incorporeal creature.
Scent (Ex): A nethersight mastiff can detect approaching
enemies, sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
True Seeing (Su): This ability functions like the true seeing
spell (caster level 16th), except that it is continuously active.
Skills: *A nethersight mastiff receives a +5 racial bonus
on Spot checks when hunting creatures that are on the
Ethereal Plane.
NIGHTMARE BEAST
Huge Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 15d10+105 (187 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 21 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +12 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 20
Attacks: 2 tusks +22 melee and 2 claws +20 melee and bite
+20 melee
Damage: Tusk 4d6+9/18–20, claw 2d4+4/19–20, bite
4d6+4/19–20
Space/Reach: 20 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Nightmares, spell-like abilities, trample
4d6+13
Special Qualities: Augmented critical, darkvision 60 ft.,
DR 15/+1, low-light vision, SR 20
Saves: Fort +16, Ref +10, Will +6
Abilities: Str 28, Dex 13, Con 24, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 11
Skills: Jump +24, Spot +13
Feats: Improved Critical (tusk), Multiattack, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 15
Treasure: 1/10th coins; 50% goods; 50% items
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 16–30 HD (Huge); 31–45 HD (Gargantuan)
With a disposition as bad as its reputation, it’s no wonder
that a nightmare beast spreads terror wherever it goes.
161
NIGHTMARE
BEAST162
A nightmare beast stands at least 20 feet tall
on its four legs. Each of its digits is tipped with a 3-foot-long
claw. Its jaws are filled with 1-foot-long teeth and flanked by
curved tusks the size of cavalry lances. A nightmare beast’s
thick, tough hide is typically dark gray with dark blue, purple,
or brown splotches in between patches of bony material. Its
red eyes, each the size of a man’s head, glow in the dark.
The nightmare beast prefers to lair in a remote cave. It
spends most of its time in search of food, and it tends to
hunt in one area until the food supply is exhausted. At that
point, it usually hibernates for up to one year, then awakens
again in a ravenous state.
This monster has no interest in treasure, nor does it often
bring any prey back to its lair, unless the kill is so large that it
cannot be consumed all at once. A nightmare beast often inadvertently eats treasures along with their owners, so occasionally items of value turn up in the creature’s lair at a later time.
Nightmare beasts speak Abyssal.
Combat
Few monsters aside from dragons are as dangerous as a
nightmare beast. The creature attacks anything that looks
like food with its teeth, tusks, and claws, dealing massive
amounts of damage by means of its augmented critical ability. And in spite of all that damage potential, its most dangerous weapons are its spell-like abilities.
Nightmares (Su): Perhaps the nightmare beast’s most
powerful weapon is the one from which its name is derived.
Every intelligent creature that falls asleep within 10 miles
of a nightmare beast must succeed at a Will save (DC 17) or
suffer from horrid, vivid nightmares of being stalked and
killed by monsters, demons, cruel enemies, or whatever else
it fears. The effect is otherwise the same as that of a nightmare
spell (caster level 15th; Will save DC 17), except that a dispel
evil spell cast on a victim does not stun the nightmare beast. A
remove curse or a successful dispel magic negates the effect.
Once a creature has either been affected by this ability or
made a successful save, it cannot be affected by that nightmare beast’s nightmare power again for 24 hours.
Spell-Like Abilities: 2/day—chain lightning, cloudkill,
dimension door (1,000 ft. range), disintegrate, dispel magic, fireball,
heat metal, incendiary cloud, lightning bolt, monster summoning V,
wall of fire. Caster level 10th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Trample (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, a nightmare beast can trample opponents at least one
size category smaller than itself by making a running jump
from up to 35 feet away. This attack deals 4d6+13 points of
bludgeoning damage. A trampled opponent can attempt
either an attack of opportunity at a –4 penalty or a Reflex
save (DC 26) for half damage.
Augmented Critical (Ex): A nightmare beast threatens a critical hit on a natural attack roll of 19–20 with any
of its natural weapons.
NIMBLEWRIGHT
Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 10d10 (55 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 24 (+7 Dex, +7 natural), touch 17, flat-footed 17
Attacks: 2 rapier-hands +11 melee
Damage: Rapier-hand 2d6+4/12–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities, tripping thrust
Special Qualities: Augmented critical, construct traits,
SR 27, vulnerabilities
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +10, Will +6
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 24, Con —, Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 19
Feats: Combat Reflexes (B), Dodge (B), Expertise (B),
Improved Disarm (B), Mobility (B), Spring Attack (B)
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Medium-size); 16–30 HD (Large)
Nimblewrights are rapier-wielding constructs that disguise
themselves as living humanoids. They often serve as hired
bodyguards, but many are employed to infiltrate organizations and secret societies or spy on individuals. Unlike most
constructs, a nimblewright is created with intelligence and
NIMBLEWRIGHTa distinct personality
that allows for intuitive
thinking and responsiveness.
Like a golem, a nimblewright is a
powerful creation that combines awesome magic with elemental forces. Its animating force is a spirit from the Elemental Plane of Water. The
process of creating a nimblewright binds the unwilling spirit
to the artificial body and subjects it to the will of the creator.
An undisguised nimblewright appears as a nondescript,
steel-colored, mechanical human. When disguised, it wears
clothes and uses spells to hide its true nature. In this way, it
can appear as almost any Medium-size humanoid it wishes
to become.
Nimblewrights speak Common, Elven, and Dwarven.
COMBAT
A nimblewright is an extremely dexterous combatant. In
battle, it brings to bear all of its special fighting skills to deprive
opponents of their weapons before running them through. If a
nimblewright has ample warning of a fight, it enhances its
combat skills with cat’s grace and haste before joining melee.
The monster fights with two rapiers that are actually parts
of its body. These rapiers are treated as natural weapons.
When not in use, the weapons fold into its forearms. A
nimblewright can fully deploy both rapiers as a free action.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—alter self, cat’s grace, entropic
shield, feather fall, haste. Caster level 10th; save DC 14 +
spell level.
Tripping Thrust (Ex): A nimblewright’s rapier-hand
attacks are powerful enough to push over creatures its own
size or smaller. An opponent who is the target of a successful
critical hit from a nimblewright must make a Reflex save
(DC 19) or be knocked prone as if tripped.
Augmented Critical (Ex): A nimblewright threatens a critical hit on a natural attack roll of 12–20. On a successful critical hit, its foe is subject to a tripping thrust attack (see above).
Construct Traits: A nimblewright is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires
a Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage,
ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death
from massive damage. It cannot heal itself but can be
healed through repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected.
A nimblewright has darkvision (60-foot range).
Vulnerabilities: A cold effect slows a nimblewright for 3 rounds, and a fire effect stuns it for 1 round.
CONSTRUCTION
A nimblewright’s body is a hollow humanoid shell made of
flexible precious metal alloys weighing 500 pounds. It costs
35,000 gp to create, which includes 15,000 gp for the body.
Assembling the body requires a successful Craft (sculpting)
or Profession (mason) check (DC 16). The creator must be
18th level and able to cast arcane spells. Completing the
ritual drains 1,600 XP from the creator and requires the
geas/quest, haste, limited wish, and polymorph any object spells.
OCEAN STRIDER
Huge Fey (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 30d6+60 (165 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft., swim 60 ft.
AC: 19 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18
Attacks: Gargantuan masterwork falchion +18/+13/+8
melee and tail slap +12 melee, or Gargantuan masterwork trident +18/+13/+8 melee and tail slap +12 melee,
or tail slap +17 melee
Damage: Gargantuan masterwork falchion 2d8+6/18–20,
Gargantuan masterwork trident 4d6+6, tail slap 1d6+2
(secondary) or 1d6+6 (primary)
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 5 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Frightful presence, ramming, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: DR 30/+3, low-light vision, SR 28,
water breathing, water walk
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +18, Will +23
Abilities: Str 19, Dex 13, Con 15, Int 16, Wis 22, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +12, Intimidate +23, Intuit Direction +16, Jump
+13, Listen +26, Spot +26, Swim +12, Wilderness Lore +16
Feats: Alertness, Blind-Fight, Cleave, Dodge, Expertise,
Improved Initiative, Mobility, Power Attack, Spring
Attack, Sunder
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 18
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: By character class
163
CHAPTER
TITLE164
Ocean striders live to protect the seas and oceans from those
who sail upon them. These immense fey consider themselves defenders of natural waterways, and they dislike
anyone who would plunder the depths for personal gain.
An ocean strider resembles a 20-foot-tall cross between an
elf and a killer whale. Like an orca, it has a mouth full of
pointed teeth, rubbery skin, black and white markings on its
body, and a stubby, fluked tail. Like an elf, it has two arms,
two legs, and a humanoid face. The typical ocean strider
wears mithral scale mail and carries a masterwork falchion
or trident sized for its convenient use.
Because of its water walk ability, an ocean strider can
move at its land speed over the surface of the ocean as
well as the bottom. Its name is derived from the
majestic picture it makes striding over the wave
tops, its weapon raised in defiance.
Once an ocean strider claims a particular
stretch of water, it considers all creatures
not native to those waters, or to the
skies above, to be intruders. It
begins by approaching ships
that enter its realm and ordering them to turn back or face
destruction. Usually, an ocean
strider is content to allow ships’
crews to reverse course, or even to
negotiate if they wish. Those who
promise to travel carefully, without
dumping their trash overboard or
killing more fish than they can eat,
can sometimes negotiate safe
passage with an ocean strider.
Only when an intruder attempts to
sail past without parleying or
attacks does the ocean strider
become openly aggressive. But
woe to those who behave properly
only until they believe themselves
out of danger, because ocean striders have been known to follow
ships for many miles if they have doubts about a crew’s commitment to proper use of the ocean’s gifts. Many a ship’s captain has tried to persuade an ocean strider to reveal the limits
of its demesne, but these canny sea-dwellers prefer to not to
let intruders know the true extent of their ability to observe
and punish wrongdoers.
Ocean striders speak Common, Elven, and Aquan.
COMBAT
In battle, an ocean strider first uses its powerful spell-like abilities to confuse, disorient, and soften up opponents. Then it
uses the Spring Attack feat to enter combat with its weapon.
Frightful Presence (Ex): The mere presence of an ocean
strider inspires terror in all creatures within 100 feet of it that
have fewer Hit Dice or levels than it has. Each potentially
affected opponent must succeed at a Will save (DC 32) or
become shaken—a condition that lasts until the opponent is
out of range. A successful save leaves that opponent immune
to that ocean strider’s frightful presence for 24 hours.
Ramming (Ex): As a standard action during its turn each
round, an ocean strider can swim at up to quadruple speed
(240 feet) and ram a waterborne target (such as a ship or
another creature). To ram, the ocean strider
must end its movement in the target’s space.
This attack deals 2d8+6 points of damage. If the
target is a creature, it can attempt either an attack of
opportunity or a Reflex save (DC 29) for half damage.
Upon ramming a ship, the ocean strider can make a
Strength check to breach its hull, which causes the ship
to sink in 1d10 minutes. The break DC varies
with the type of vessel rammed, as follows:
rowboat DC 20, keelboat DC 23, sailing
ship or longship DC 25, warship DC 27,
or galley DC 30. (See Chapter 5 of the
DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide for information
about ships.) Regardless of the check result,
every creature aboard must attempt a
Reflex saving throw (DC 15). Success
means the creature takes 1d10 points of
damage from being thrown about by
the impact; failure means the creature is hurled overboard.
Spell-Like Abilities: 6/day—
control water, fog cloud, ice
storm, obscuring mist; 5/day—
acid fog, cone of cold, elemental swarm
(water only), horrid wilting, summon
nature’s ally IX (water or aquatic
creatures only). Caster level 20th;
save DC 17 + spell level.
Water Breathing (Ex): An
ocean strider has gills as well as
lungs, so it can breathe water as
well as it can air.
Water Walk (Su): An ocean
strider continuously produces an effect like
that of a water walk spell (caster level 20th).
OCEAN STRIDER CHARACTERS
An ocean strider’s preferred class is ranger, though many
choose to become clerics. Ocean strider clerics worship
Deep Sashelas and may choose any two of the following
domains: Chaos, Protection, and Water. Claims by sea captains that they have encountered shadowdancer ocean striders remain unconfirmed.
An ocean strider PC’s effective character level (ECL) is
equal to its class level + 35. Thus, a 1st-level ocean strider
ranger has an ECL of 36 and is the equivalent of a 36thlevel character.
OCEAN
STRIDERORCWORT
An orcwort is a walking, bloodthirsty terror that prefers to
make its home on the
fringe of a populated area.
This giant plant wanders
by night until it finds an
appropriate spot to settle,
then sinks some of its
roots into the ground,
making it seem that an
immense tree has grown
up in the spot overnight.
Over the course of the next
week, the orcwort produces
five to twenty pods that,
when mature, break open to
release mobile fruits called
wortlings. The parent plant
then sends out its wortlings in hunting parties to
bring back warm-blooded
sustenance—usually livestock and humanoids.
An orcwort is capable of
devouring the entire population of a small village
in a single feeding. Once
it has stripped an area of
warm-blooded animal life, it moves on in search
of other population centers.
COMBAT
Both the orcwort and its wortlings
are effective combatants. They
share the following qualities.
Partial Immunity to Piercing (Ex): Piercing weapons deal
only half damage to orcworts
and wortlings. The minimum
damage per hit with such a
weapon is 1 point.
Plant Traits (Ex): An orcwort
or wortling is immune to poison,
sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or mind-affecting effects.
Woodsense (Ex): An orcwort or
wortling can automatically sense the
location of anything within 60 feet
that is in contact with vegetation,
even objects or creatures that are
not in contact with the same
vegetation as itself.
Skills and Feats: Orcworts
and wortlings gain skills and
feats as though they were fey.
165
ORCWORT
Wortling Orcwort
Small Plant Colossal Plant
Hit Dice: 3d8 (13 hp) 32d8+288 (432 hp)
Initiative: +6 +2
Speed: 30 ft., climb 15 ft. 10 ft.
AC: 16 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +3 natural), 12 (–8 size, –2 Dex, +12 natural),
touch 13, flat-footed 14 touch 0, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 2 claws +5 melee 6 slams +30 melee
Damage: Claw 1d3+2 plus poison Slam 4d6+14
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 40 ft. by 40 ft./25 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison, swarming Entangling roots, improved grab, paralysis,
swallow whole
Special Qualities: Partial immunity to piercing, DR 5/–, partial immunity to piercing, plant
plantmind, plant traits, woodsense traits, telepathy, woodsense
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +1 Fort +27, Ref +8, Will +13
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 14, Con 11, Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 6 Str 39, Dex 7, Con 29, Int 10, Wis 16, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +10, Hide +11, Move Silently +7 Hide –3, Move Silently +13
Feats: Improved Initiative Improved Initiative
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm plains, hills, and marsh Temperate or warm plains, hills, and marsh
Organization: Band (5–20) Crop (1 orcwort plus 5–20 wortlings)
Challenge Rating: 3 20
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Medium-size) 33–64 HD (Colossal)166
WORTLING
Wortlings are the mature fruits of the orcwort plant. When
one of the orcwort’s pods ripens, it falls to the ground and
breaks open to release a wortling.
When first “hatched,” a wortling resembles a small,
wrinkled, purple orc. Its body seems portly, and its arms
and legs are somewhat lumpy compared with those of a
real humanoid. Although its face resembles that of a
humanoid, a wortling is blind and cannot speak, hear, or
smell—its apparent sensory organs are merely blobs of
plant tissue with no actual function.
A hungry orcwort dispatches up to twenty of its “ripe”
wortlings at a time to hunt food and bring it back. The
wortlings navigate terrain using their woodsense. When on
the prowl, wortlings seek out Medium-size or smaller prey
because such creatures are easier to transport back to the
parent plant than larger creatures.
The average life span of a wortling is 1d4+1 days. If any
wortlings are left alive when the parent plant is ready to
move on, the orcwort commands them to arrange themselves well apart from each other at the extreme range of
its telepathy and root themselves. If left undisturbed for
one year, each of these wortlings grows into a new orcwort, which pulls up its roots and begins looking for food.
During its maturation period, a rooted wortling is immobile and helpless.
Combat
Wortlings use very simple tactics—overwhelm, subdue,
and return with the food. In melee, they prefer to gang up
on one foe rather than attack separate enemies. They fight
with a great sense of urgency, and when they do manage to
bring down a foe, a few of them immediately carry off their
prize to feed the orcwort, leaving any remaining wortlings
to continue the hunt. They never willingly enter areas without natural vegetation because they are effectively blind in
such places.
Poison (Ex): A wortling delivers its poison (Fortitude
save DC 11) with each successful claw attack. The initial
damage is sleep for 1 minute, and the secondary damage is
sleep for 1d10 minutes. Both of these sleep effects work only
against living creatures but otherwise function as the spell
of the same name.
Swarming (Ex): Wortlings can swarm over and around
each other with ease, so up to three of them can occupy the
same 5-foot-by-5-foot space. They are likewise adept at
attacking as a group; for every wortling that is grappling a
foe (grapple bonus +0), every wortling gets a +1 competence
bonus on attack rolls against that foe.
Plantmind (Ex): All wortlings within fifteen miles of
their orcwort parent are in constant communication. If
one is aware of a particular danger, they all are. If one in a
particular group is not flat-footed, none of them are. No
wortling in such a group is considered flanked unless they
all are.
ORCWORT
An orcwort looks like a gigantic, woody pitcher plant
draped in thick creeper vines. It is crowned with a canopy
of bramblelike branches and green, bushy foliage. Dormant wortling pods hang from the orcwort’s branches,
resembling round, oversized prunes.
Combat
In combat, an orcwort reaches out with its vines to entwine
nearby prey. It then uses other tendrils to pick out choice
victims one at a time and drop them into its open maw. An
orcwort recalls any wortling raiding parties it has sent out
whenever it is under attack.
Entangling Roots (Ex): As a free action, an orcwort can
twist its roots around all creatures within 15 feet of it, holding them fast. This effect otherwise functions like an entangle spell (caster level 10th; save DC 24).
Improved Grab (Ex): If an orcwort hits a Gargantuan or
smaller opponent with a slam attack, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +54). If it
gets a hold, it can transfer the opponent to its maw in the
next round. Alternatively, the orcwort has the option to
conduct the grapple normally, or simply use one tendril to
hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the
orcwort is not considered grappled). In either case, each
successful grapple check it makes during successive
rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Paralysis (Ex): An orcwort secretes digestive juices that
can paralyze creatures in contact with it. Any creature swallowed by an orcwort must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
35) or be paralyzed for 2d4 rounds.
Swallow Whole (Ex): An orcwort can swallow a Huge
or smaller creature by making a successful grapple check
(grapple bonus +54), provided it already has that opponent
in its maw (see Improved Grab, above). Once inside the
orcwort’s pitcher, the opponent takes 2d8+8 points of acid
damage per round and is subject to the paralyzing effect of
its digestive juices (see Paralysis, above). A successful grapple check allows a swallowed creature to climb out of the
pitcher (assuming it is not paralyzed) and return to the orcwort’s maw, where another successful grapple check is
needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can
try to cut its way out with either claws or a light piercing or
slashing weapon. Dealing at least 20 points of damage to
the pitcher (AC 18) in this way creates an opening large
enough to permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature
exits, muscular action closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. The orcwort’s
pitcher can hold 2 Huge, 8 Large, 32 Medium-size, or 128
Small or smaller creatures.
Telepathy (Su): An orcwort can communicate telepathically with any of its wortlings within fifteen miles.
ORCWORTORMYRR
Huge Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 7d8+21 (52 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 20 ft., swim 40 ft.
AC: 17 (–2 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 15
Attacks: 4 claws +13 melee and bite +8 melee, or weapon
+13/+8 melee and 3 light weapons +13 melee and bite +8
melee, or weapon +11/+6 melee and 3 weapons (at least
one of which is not light) +11 melee and bite +8 melee,
or 4 stones +5 ranged
Damage: Claw 2d4+8, by weapon (damage bonus +8 for
primary hand and +4 for each off hand), bite 1d8+4,
stone 1d6+8 (primary hand) or 1d6+4 (off hand)
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 25 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Constrict 1d8+12, improved grab
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., enhanced multiweapon fighting, weapon use
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +6
Abilities: Str 26, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 11, Wis 12, Cha 13
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) +9, Listen +11, Spellcraft +9,
Swim +16
Feats: Multidexterity, Multiweapon Fighting (B)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm aquatic (rivers,
lakes, and the shores of both)
Organization: Solitary, pair, or tribe (6–12)
Challenge Rating: 6
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually lawful neutral
Advancement: 8–14 HD (Huge);
15–21 HD (Gargantuan)
Ormyrrs are intelligent, seminomadic
creatures that live
in small settlements
along muddy river
banks and lake
shores. For the
most part, they
keep to themselves,
except while hunting or feeding their passion for acquiring
magic items.
An ormyrr has an enormous, grublike body that can measure as much as 25 feet long. At the top of the body is a froglike
head that appears impossibly large and heavy. Below the head,
four short but powerful arms extend out from the body. Thick,
bony ridges above the eyes and a wide mouth filled with serrated teeth complete the beast’s monstrous appearance.
Hunting parties of ormyrrs can roam as far as 40 miles
from their homes. They travel by river as much as possible
during their forays, then come ashore for the actual hunt.
Ormyrrs have no magical ability at all, but magic fascinates them; in fact, their goal as a race is to develop a unique
ormyrr magic. They covet magic and magic items, and the
chance to take possession of a magic item, scroll, or book is
the one thing that can make one of these normally reasonable creatures lie, steal, or attack without provocation.
Needless to say, this tendency can draw them into conflict
with adventurers. Since they are innately lawful, however,
those seeking to recover magic items that ormyrrs have
stolen can sometimes get farther by appealing to the creatures’ sense of right and wrong than by attacking, hurling
accusations, or trying to steal the items back.
Ormyrrs speak Common.
COMBAT
Most often, ormyrrs fight with weapons rather than with
their claws. The typical ormyrr possesses at least one
magic weapon, usually with a +1 or +2 enhancement
bonus, and fights with more than one weapon at once to
take advantage of its enhanced multiweapon fighting special quality.
A preferred tactic among ormyrrs is to hide along a river
bank and ambush enemies with a hail of hurled stones, sling
stones, axes, and nets. If the situation looks
promising, the ormyrrs close in with
drawn weapons. If not, they
simply slip into the river and
swim away from danger.
Constrict (Ex): With a successful grapple check, an ormyrr
can crush a grabbed opponent,
dealing 1d8+12
points of bludgeoning damage.
Improved Grab (Ex):
If an ormyrr hits an opponent
that is at least one size category
smaller than itself with two claw
attacks, it deals normal damage
and attempts to start a grapple
as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus
+23). If it gets a hold, it also constricts on the same round.
Thereafter, the ormyrr has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its claws to hold the opponent
(–20 penalty on grapple check, but the ormyrr is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check
it makes during successive rounds automatically deals
damage for two claw attacks.
Enhanced Multiweapon Fighting (Ex): This ability
lessens the penalty for off-hand weapon use by 2 for both
primary and off hands. Thus, when combined with the
creature’s Multidexterity and Multiweapon Fighting feats,
it allows the use of one or more light off-hand weapons with
no penalty on the attack rolls.
Weapon Use (Ex): An ormyrr is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons.
167
ORMYRR168
PHASE WASP
Tiny Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 2d10 (11 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 10 ft., fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 17 (+2 size, +4 Dex, +1 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Sting +0 melee
Damage: Sting 1d4–4
Space/Reach: 2 1/2 ft. by 2 1/2 ft./0 ft.
Special Attacks: Magic missile
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, see
invisibility
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +7, Will +2
Abilities: Str 3, Dex 19, Con 10, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 6
Skills: Listen +6, Spot +6, Wilderness Lore +3
Feats: Alertness
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate or warm land
Organization: Swarm (5–20)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 3–4 HD (Tiny); 5–6 HD (Small)
Phase wasps are 18-inch-long insects that can see and attack
invisible and ethereal creatures (in the latter case, without crossing the planar boundary). They rarely attack creatures three or
more size categories larger than themselves unless provoked.
Like ordinary wasps, these creatures live in large colonies.
Each colony builds a nest about 10 feet in diameter
out of “paper” that its members
have made from chewed-up wood or paper and their own
saliva. Because such a nest requires a tremendous amount of
paper, many wizards and libraries offer bounties for the
destruction of nearby phase wasp nests.
Though they do not speak, phase wasps utilize an elaborate signaling system to communicate within their hives.
Their “signal language” seems to be based on a system of
subtle smells, body postures, and flight patterns.
COMBAT
Normally, phase wasps attack only to defend themselves or
their nests. They converge on intruders in swarms, fire
their magic missiles, and then swoop in to sting until they
can use their missiles again.
Magic Missile (Sp): A phase wasp can produce an effect
that functions like a magic missile spell (caster level 3rd).
Once it has used this ability, it must wait 1d4 rounds before
it can do so again.
See Invisibility (Sp): A phase wasp produces an effect like
that of a see invisibility spell (caster level 3rd), except that is
always active.
PHOENIX
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 20d10+40 (150 hp)
Initiative: +7
Speed: 15 ft., fly 200 ft. (average)
AC: 23 (–1 size, +3 Dex, +6 natural, +5 deflection), touch
17, flat-footed 23
Attacks: 2 claws +23 melee, or bite +23 melee
Damage: Claw 1d8+4/19–20, bite 2d6+4
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 15 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Shriek, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., defensive aura, DR
20/+3, immolation, low-light vision, planar travel, spelllike metamagic, SR 35, telepathy, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +15, Will +11
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 16, Con 15, Int 18, Wis 17, Cha 21
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) +20, Knowledge (history) +20,
Spot +25
Feats: Empower Spell, Enlarge Spell, Extend Spell, Flyby
Attack, Heighten Spell, Improved Critical (claw),
Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Maximize Spell
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 24
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral good
Advancement: —
The phoenix, or firebird, is a creature of tremendous power
and potent omen. Many intelligent races look upon it as a
god, or at least as a god’s messenger.
PHASE WASPPhysically, a phoenix resembles an immense bird of prey.
It measures between 10 and 15 feet from beak to tail, but its
wingspan can be as wide as 40 feet. By far its most striking
feature, however, is its plumage. All of its feathers are the
colors of fire—primarily scarlet, crimson, and orange. In
flight or at rest, a phoenix looks like a bird made of flame.
When a phoenix reaches the end of its natural life, or
when it finds itself in an extreme, life-threatening situation,
it immolates itself with intense fire. After its death,
a new phoenix arises from the ashes.
Because of its traditional association with renewal and rebirth,
most cultures ascribe some
symbolic meaning to the
sighting of a phoenix. Some
consider it a positive omen—
a sign of the gods’ favor and a
promise of renewed life and
increased prosperity in
the coming years. Others
(usually those with a
darker outlook on life) see
the firebird as a sign of
approaching death and
destruction—an ordeal
that only the strongest
will survive. Whatever
meaning a particular culture associates with this creature, there’s no doubt that it is
on the side of good. A phoenix doesn’t
involve itself in worldly affairs or join
in mundane conflicts, but neither does
it shy away from attacking evil.
COMBAT
In battle, a phoenix usually begins by shrieking to soften up
its enemies before joining melee with its claws and beak. It
has no fear of fighting to the death, since its immolation
ability ensures its later rebirth.
Shriek (Ex): Once per minute, a phoenix can utter a war
shriek that forces every opponent within 30 feet to succeed
at a Will save (DC 22) or be slowed (as the slow spell) for 1
round. This is a sonic, mind-affecting effect.
Spell-Like Abilities: Always active—detect evil, detect magic,
protection from evil; at will—blindness, blink, blur, color spray, cure
light wounds, dancing lights, find the path, find traps, fire seeds (using
drops of its own blood rather than holly berries as a material
component; no acorn grenades), heal, invisibility, misdirection,
negative energy protection, neutralize poison, polymorph self, produce
flame, remove fear, remove curse, see invisibility; 1/day—incendiary
cloud, reincarnate, pyrotechnics, summon nature’s ally IX, veil, wall
of fire. Caster level 20th; save DC 15 + spell level.
After 10 rounds of ritual and preparation—dismissal, dispel
evil, dispel magic. Caster level 40th; save DC 15 + spell level.
Defensive Aura (Sp): A phoenix has a +5 deflection bonus
to Armor Class. This ability is always in effect.
Immolation (Su): When it knows that death is near, a
phoenix immolates itself as a full-round action. This produces a cloud of flame in a 20-foot-high, 15-foot-radius
spread. Each creature in the area takes 40d6 points of
damage (Reflex DC 22 half ). Half of this damage is fire;
the rest results directly from divine power and is therefore
not subject to reduction by protection from elements (fire), fire
shield (chill shield), or similar
magic. This action kills the
original phoenix and produces a new one, fully
grown and unharmed,
from the ashes. This new
bird arrives at the end of
the round.
Planar Travel (Su): A
phoenix can enter and
exit the Astral Plane or
the Ethereal Plane at will
and navigate through
these planes without error or risk.
Spell-Like Metamagic
(Ex): A phoenix can apply
any one of its metamagic
feats (Empower Spell, Enlarge Spell, Extend Spell,
Heighten Spell, Maximize
Spell) to a spell-like ability
by using that ability as a fullround action.
Telepathy (Su): A phoenix can
communicate telepathically with any
nonavian creature within 60 feet. It can
also speak normally with any avians.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): A phoenix retains its Dexterity
bonus to AC even when flat-footed, and it cannot be
flanked. Even if it fails a Spot check, it still knows that something is in the area; it merely lacks any details as to its exact
location or description.
PLANETOUCHED
“Planetouched” is a term used to describe a creature that can
trace its bloodline back to an outsider. The effects of an outsider’s bloodline can manifest in its descendants for many
generations. Though not as dramatically altered as halffiends or half-celestials, the planetouched still have some
special qualities because of their unusual ancestors.
The planetouched discussed here are exceedingly rare.
Chaonds are humans with slaadi blood, while zenythris are
descended from mysterious beings of law whose identity is
only guessed at.
169
PLANETOUCHED170
There are no “typical” chaonds and zenythris. These creatures neither form their own cultures nor belong to homogenous societies. Instead, they adopt the standards and the
beliefs of the cultures they are born into.
Combat
Chaonds and zenythris fight with
weapons as humanoids do.
Outsider Traits: A planetouched has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised
or resurrected.
CHAOND
Infused with primal forces, chaonds are living embodiments of the
force of chaos in the universe.
Though their slaadi ancestry may be
several generations removed, these
beings still fit only marginally into civilized societies.
A chaond resembles a
human but seems much
cruder, both in form
and in temperament. Its
brutish appearance is
usually marked by wild,
unkempt hair, blocky
facial features, and a
stocky torso and limbs.
Its true nonhuman nature is given away by the slow, shifting colors of its eyes, hair, or skin. The typical chaond has a
gravelly voice that tends to come out like a croak
when the creature is excited.
Most chaonds are chaotically aligned, which
has earned them a reputation as wily and whimsical beings. They often exist on the fringe of a
society because they refuse to succumb to the
rule of law. Chaonds wishing to explore their
primal sides usually take on professions that
involve adventuring in the natural wilderness or harnessing elemental forces.
Chaonds speak Common.
Combat
Considering their heritage, it should be no
surprise that most chaonds fight dirty, with
little regard for rules or fairness. They often
conceal small, poisoned weapons on
their persons. But while chaonds
enjoy a good brawl, there are
few issues that they consider worthy of a fight to
the death.
Shatter (Sp): Once per
day, a chaond can use shatter (caster level 1st or the
chaond’s character level,
whichever is higher; save
DC 11).
PLANETOUCHED
Chaond Zenythri
Medium-Size Outsider Medium-Size Outsider
Hit Dice: 1d8+1 (5 hp) 1d8 (4 hp)
Initiative: +2 +1
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft.
AC: 12 (+2 Dex), touch 12, flat-footed 10 11 (+1 Dex), touch 11, flat-footed 10
Attacks: Sickle +1 melee, or dart +3 ranged Scimitar +3 melee, or light crossbow +2 ranged
Damage: Sickle 1d6, dart 1d4 Scimitar 1d6+1/18–20, light crossbow 1d8/19–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Shatter True strike
Special Qualities: Acid resistance 5, cold resistance 5, outsider Electricity resistance 5, fire resistance 5, outsider
traits, sonic resistance 5 traits, sonic resistance 5
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +2 Fort +2, Ref +3, Will+3
Abilities: Str 11, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 9 Str 13, Dex 12, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 9
Skills: Escape Artist +5, Jump +4, Move Silently +4, Balance +6, Intuit Direction +4, Search +4
Tumble +5
Feats: Dodge Weapon Focus (scimitar)
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary or twins Solitary
Challenge Rating: 1 1
Treasure: Standard Standard
Alignment: Usually chaotic Usually lawful
Advancement: By character class By character class
MDSkills: A chaond receives a +2 racial bonus on Escape
Artist and Tumble checks.
Chaond Characters
The first class taken by a chaond character becomes that
character’s favored class. Once chosen, it cannot be changed.
A chaond PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to
its class level + 1. Thus, a 1st-level chaond wizard has an ECL
of 2 and is the equivalent of a 2nd-level character.
ZENYTHRI
Zenythris are often viewed as contemplative beings who
strive for personal perfection in every action they take. Many
feel the need to impose their own brand of order on the
world about them. Some even travel to lawless regions for
the express purpose of creating order there. From a zenythri’s
viewpoint, such exercises serve to illuminate the underlying
purpose and structure that lies dormant in all things.
A zenythri appears as a perfect version of a human. Its
skin is flawlessly smooth, and its muscles are well defined
and taut. Even its hair falls effortlessly into place around its
handsomely chiseled face. A zenythri could almost blend
unnoticed among humans were it not for the slightly blue
or purple tint of its skin and hair.
Most zenythris feel compelled to contribute to the societies in which they dwell. As such, they actively work
toward positions of responsibility, which often bring with
them significant social status. Zenythris are natural leaders
and consummate strategists, and they gladly accept leadership roles. These planetouched seem to have no interest in
good or evil so long as they accomplish their goals. Such
a disposition lends itself as readily to tyrannical
methods as benign ones.
Zenythris speak Common. A zenythri that
acquires additional languages speaks them perfectly,
without any sort of accent.
Combat
Zenythris fight instinctively, sizing up opponents for strengths and weaknesses during
melee. They relish in executing difficult
combat moves and work hard to develop
complex fighting styles.
True Strike (Sp): Once per day, a zenythri can
use true strike (caster level 1st or the zenythri’s
character level, whichever is higher).
Skills: A zenythri receives a +2 racial
bonus on Balance and Intuit Direction checks.
Zenythri Characters
A zenythri’s favored class is monk.
A zenythri PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its
class level + 1. Thus, a 1st-level
zenythri monk has an ECL of 2 and is the equivalent of a
2nd-level character.
PSURLON
Psurlons are wormlike creatures with formidable mental
powers. The resemblance between psurlons and worms is
likely more than coincidence; perhaps the monsters were
magically created from earthworms, or an earthworm is a
radically degenerate form of psurlon.
A psurlon has a long, tubular, pinkish body marked with
faint rings, just like an earthworm’s. It also has two arms and
two legs, each of which also looks like a giant earthworm. The
psurlon’s head is little more than a blunt end to its tubular
body. Its only facial feature is a circular maw filled with gnashing teeth that serves as a mouth. It has visual organs (for darkvision) spaced evenly around the head. The typical psurlon
wears a decorative or utilitarian belt fitted with straps and
hooks to carry items, but no other clothing or armor.
Psurlons often choose to live solitary lives, or to live only
with their mates. Sometimes, however, psurlons form small
communities called clusters for the purpose of claiming territory or working toward a common cause.
Psurlons speak Undercommon.
COMBAT
Psurlons never use melee weapons. They can fight with
their bare claws and teeth, but this does not make them
very formidable opponents in physical combat. The real danger a
psurlon presents is in its ability
to cloud, numb, and control the
minds of others.
Blindsight (Ex): A psurlon
can ascertain its surroundings by
sensing sound, scent, heat, and vibration. This ability enables it to discern
objects and creatures within 60 feet. The
psurlon usually does not need to make
Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures
within range of its blindsight.
Immunities (Ex): Psurlons are immune to
sleep, charm, and hold effects.
Telepathy (Su): A psurlon can communicate
telepathically with any creature within 250 feet
that has a language.
AVERAGE PSURLON
Average psurlons perform all day-today tasks related to keeping a cluster running
smoothly. Of all psurlons, it is these that most
often strike out to live
on their own.
171
PSURLON
MD172
An average psurlon stands about 5 feet tall and weighs
about 130 pounds.
Combat
Although they do not relish combat, average psurlons are
naturally suspicious and bad-tempered. They usually
unleash their spell-like abilities against anything that
approaches too closely. They usually begin with mind fog and
then, if menaced by a whole group, follow up with dominate
person to make physically powerful foes turn on their allies.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—detect thoughts, dominate
person, hold monster, mind fog, sleep; 1/day—stoneskin. Caster
level 10th; save DC 13 + spell level.
ELDER PSURLON
Elder psurlons are leaders within their communities. They
are respected for their experience, resourcefulness, and
superior mental abilities.
An elder psurlon stands about 5 feet tall and weighs
about 130 pounds.
Combat
Elder psurlons use much the same tactics as average
psurlons do, but they are more likely to direct the battle
from the rear while their underlings bear the brunt of
the fighting.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—detect thoughts, dominate
person, hold monster, mass suggestion, mind fog, sleep; 1/day—
stoneskin. Caster level 12th; save DC 13 + spell level.
GIANT PSURLON
Giant psurlons are bred for combat. Like all psurlons, however, their mental powers are more formidable than their
physical abilities.
A giant psurlon stands 12 feet tall and weighs about 600
pounds.
PSURLON
Average Psurlon Elder Psurlon Giant Psurlon
Medium-Size Aberration Medium-Size Aberration Large Aberration
Hit Dice: 7d8+7 (38 hp) 12d8+12 (66 hp) 18d8+36 (117 hp)
Initiative: +6 +6 +5
Speed: 30 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft.
AC: 12 (+2 Dex), 12 (+2 Dex), 10 (–1 size, +1 Dex),
touch 12, flat-footed 10 touch 12, flat-footed 10 touch 10, flat-footed 9
Attacks: 2 claws +6 melee and bite 2 claws +11 melee and bite 2 claws +16 melee and bite
+4 melee +9 melee +14 melee
Damage: Claw 1d4+1, bite 2d4 Claw 1d4+2, bite 2d4+1 Claw 1d6+4, bite 2d6+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft. 10 ft. by 20 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities Spell-like abilities Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., darkvision Blindsight 60 ft., darkvision Blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120
120 ft., DR 15/+1, immunities, 120 ft., DR 15/+1, immunities, ft., DR 15/+1, immunities,
SR 14, telepathy SR 16, telepathy SR 16, telepathy
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +7 Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +13 Fort +10, Ref +9, Will +17
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 14, Con 12, Str 14, Dex 15, Con 12, Str 18, Dex 12, Con 15,
Int 18, Wis 11, Cha 17 Int 20, Wis 17, Cha 17 Int 17, Wis 18, Cha 17
Skills: Balance +12, Concentration +11, Balance +15, Concentration +16, Balance +12, Concentration
Escape Artist +10, Heal +10, Escape Artist +10, Heal +16, +20, Escape Artist +10, Heal
Spellcraft +14 Spellcraft +18 +18, Spellcraft +19
Feats: Combat Casting, Dodge, Combat Casting, Dodge, Combat Casting, Expertise,
Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Expertise, Improved Initiative, Great Fortitude, Improved
Multiattack Iron Will, Mobility, Multiattack Initiative, Iron Will, Lightning
Reflexes, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Underground Underground Underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, team (3–6 Solitary, cluster (1 plus 8–14 Solitary or strike team (1 plus
plus 1 elder psurlon), cluster average psurlons), or strike 1 elder psurlon and 3–6
(8–14 plus 1 elder psurlon), or team (1 plus 1 giant psurlon and average psurlons)
strike team (3–6 plus 1 elder 3–6 average psurlons)
psurlon and 1 giant psurlon)
Challenge Rating: 5 9 15
Treasure: Standard Standard Standard
Alignment: Usually lawful evil Usually lawful evil Always neutral evil
Advancement: 8–14 HD (Medium-size) 13–24 HD (Medium-size) 19–36 HD (Large)Combat
Giant psurlons prefer to attack from afar. After softening up
the opposition with mind fog, a giant psurlon follows up with
disintegrate against the most dangerous opponent.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—detect thoughts, dominate person, hold monster, mass suggestion, mind fog, sleep;
1/day—disintegrate, stoneskin. Caster level 18th; save DC 13 +
spell level.
RAGEWIND
Large Undead
Hit Dice: 31d12 (201 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: Fly 120 ft. (perfect)
AC: 22 (–1 size, +5 Dex, +8 deflection), touch 22, flatfooted 17
Attacks: 6 longswords +17/+12/+7 melee
Damage: Longsword 1d8+3/19–20
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Blade fury, whirlwind
Special Qualities: DR 20/+3, invisibility, see invisibility,
SR 30, superior multiweapon fighting, undead traits,
weapon proficiency
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +15, Will +18
Abilities: Str 17, Dex 20, Con —, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 12
Skills: Balance +7, Hide +16, Intuit Direction +6,
Jump +5, Listen +21, Search +22,
Spot +22, Tumble +20
Feats: Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes,
Dodge, Expertise, Flyby Attack,
Improved Disarm, Mobility, Spring
Attack, Whirlwind Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land
and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair,
or cluster (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 19
Treasure: None (but see
below)
Alignment: Usually chaotic
evil
Advancement: 32–48 HD
(Large); 49–64 HD (Huge)
Also called sword spirits, ragewinds are the embodied wrath
of dead warriors who perished
in useless battles. They are usually found in the most volatile
and violent of the Outer Planes,
but a few sometimes escape to
wander the Material Plane as
well. On rare occasions, ragewinds
form on the Material Plane at the sites of massive battles
with heavy casualties.
A ragewind normally appears as a churning whirlwind,
within which dozens of suspended weapons dance and clash.
Its true form is a vaguely humanoid, semisolid cloud of white
or gray fog. It has no treasure other than the weapons it carries.
A ragewind can speak Common in a shrill voice that
sounds like the howling of an autumn wind, but it seldom
bothers to do so.
COMBAT
Though longswords are specified in the statistics given
above, a ragewind may incorporate and utilize any sort of
melee weapon, as long as each is at least one size category
smaller than the monster. Some of these weapons may have
magical properties, at the DM’s option. No matter how
many weapons are incorporated into the ragewind’s form, it
can bring no more than six of them to bear at a time.
A ragewind attacks with the weapons that are held aloft
in its swirling winds. Each of these weapons functions
independently, as though wielded by a different individual. The ragewind delights in disarming its opponents
and using their own weapons against them. If overmatched, it uses its invisibility to escape.
Blade Fury (Su): Three times per day, a ragewind can
expand itself outward into a 15-foot-radius spread, filling
that entire space with its whirling weapons. This attack
deals 20d6 points of slashing damage to every
creature within that area (Reflex DC
26 half ). Immediately after this
attack, the ragewind reverts to its
normal size and shape. Once it has
used its blade fury attack, it must
wait 1d4+1 rounds before it can do
so again. A ragewind cannot benefit from both blade fury and
whirlwind at the same time.
Whirlwind (Su): A ragewind can intensify the swirling
air that composes its usual form
to the strength of a whirlwind as
a free action. When it does so,
it transforms into a whirling
mass of air and weapons 5 feet
wide and 20 feet high. Each creature that is at least two size categories smaller than the ragewind and in contact with it
must succeed at a Reflex save (DC
26) or take 3d6 points of damage.
Whether or not this save is successful, an affected creature
must immediately make a second
Reflex save against the same DC. Failure
indicates that the affected creature is picked up by
173
RAGEWIND174
the winds and takes an additional 1d8
points of damage that round and each
round thereafter that it remains suspended in the winds. (The ragewind may
also direct weapon attacks at creatures
caught within its whirlwind if desired,
though it gains no special bonuses for
doing so.) A flying creature may leave the
whirlwind with a successful Reflex save,
though it still takes damage for the
round in which it does so.
A ragewind may also cause its whirlwind to touch the ground, kicking up a
swirling cloud of debris with a 10-foot
radius. This cloud obscures all vision,
including darkvision, beyond 5 feet.
Creatures at a distance of 5 feet have
one-half concealment, and those
farther away have total concealment. A creature caught in this
dust cloud must succeed at a
Concentration check (DC 20) to cast a spell.
Invisibility (Su): At will, a ragewind can suppress its
whirlwind to become invisible. This ability otherwise functions like the invisibility spell (caster level 20th).
See Invisibility (Su): This ability functions like the see invisibility spell (caster level 20th), except that it is always active.
Superior Multiweapon Fighting (Ex): A ragewind fights
with six weapons at once. Because the creature is an amalgam of many dead warriors, a separate intelligence controls
each weapon. Thus, the ragewind has no penalty on attack
rolls for attacking with multiple weapons, and the number
of attacks and the damage bonus for each weapon are calculated as though the weapon were held in a primary hand.
Undead Traits: A ragewind is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death
effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires a
Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. It is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from massive damage. A ragewind cannot be raised, and resurrection works only if it is
willing. The creature has darkvision (60-foot range).
Weapon Proficiency: A ragewind is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons.
RAGGAMOFFYN
Raggamoffyns are mysterious constructs composed of animated scraps and bits of cloth, metal, or other refuse from
civilized societies—particularly those where magic is
common. Raggamoffyns tend to cluster together, operating
as much in secret as possible, taking control of selected
hosts to further their agendas.
Unlike other constructs, a raggamoffyn is not the result
of any deliberate act of creation. Rather, it is formed when
leftover magical energy interacts
with inanimate objects. The exact
process is not well understood, but
it always results in one of four
types of raggamoffyn.
A raggamoffyn appears as an animated, ragtag assortment of odds
and ends, roughly humanoid in shape.
The four types differ both in the kinds of
refuse that form their bodies and the powers
they possess.
COMBAT
Above all, a raggamoffyn seeks to acquire a host that it can
dominate. The creatures refrain from harming potential hosts
as long as possible, so they work quickly by rushing in with
touch attacks. A foe that is successfully dominated is
wrapped by the raggamoffyn, which then uses its host to
defend itself and other raggamoffyns. Raggamoffyns
unleash their full melee attack capabilities against foes that
are resistant to their mind controlling powers, fearing rightfully that an escaped foe will warn others of the raggamoffyn’s existence.
Control Host (Su): A raggamoffyn can attempt to take
control of any creature it has wrapped (see below). This ability functions like the dominate monster spell (caster level
18th; save DC varies; see individual descriptions). As a free
action, the monster may relinquish control over its host by
physically and mentally disengaging itself from the latter’s
body. Use the captured one template (see the appendix) for a
creature under the control of a raggamoffyn.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a raggamoffyn hits an opponent
that is its own size or smaller with a slam attack, it deals normal
damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without
provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus varies; see
individual descriptions). If it gets a hold, it can attempt to wrap
(see below) in the next round. Alternatively, the raggamoffyn
has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use
its appendage to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the raggamoffyn is not considered grappled). In
either case, each successful grapple check it makes during
successive rounds automatically deals slam damage.
Wrap (Ex): With a successful grapple check, a raggamoffyn
can wrap itself around any foe it has already grabbed with
another successful grapple check. The monster forms a
skintight layer around the wrapped creature, covering it from
head to toe but leaving enough space for the creature to
breathe through its mouth and nose. Attacks on such a target
deal half their damage to the monster and half to the wrapped
creature. An affected creature can extract itself by making a
successful grapple check. Once it has wrapped a creature, the
raggamoffyn can attempt to control it on its next action.
Construct Traits: A raggamoffyn is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and any effect that requires
RAGGAMOFFYNa Fortitude save unless it also works on objects. The creature
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain, or death from massive
damage. It cannot heal itself but can be healed through
repair. It cannot be raised or resurrected. A raggamoffyn has
darkvision (60-foot range).
TATTERDEMANIMAL
Tatterdemanimals are the least powerful of the raggamoffyns. They often lurk around rubbish mounds and other
places where refuse is heaped.
A tatterdemanimal appears as a swirling heap of small,
dirty, tattered rags and other scraps of cloth.
Combat
Tatterdemanimals often take animals as hosts because they
are the easier to capture.
Control Host (Su): The tatterdemanimal’s control host
ability has a Will save DC of 12.
Improved Grab (Ex): A tatterdemanimal’s grapple bonus
is +1.
175
RAGGAMOFFYN
Tatterdemanimal Common Raggamoffyn
Small Construct Medium-Size Construct
Hit Dice: 1d10 (5 hp) 3d10 (16 hp)
Initiative: +5 +2
Speed: 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (clumsy) 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (clumsy)
AC: 16 (+1 size, +5 Dex), 17 (+2 Dex, +5 natural),
touch 16, flat-footed 11 touch 12, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Slam +1 melee Slam +4 melee
Damage: Slam 1d4 Slam 1d6+3
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Control host, improved grab, wrap Control host, improved grab, suffocate, wrap
Special Qualities: Construct traits, immunity to blunt weapons Construct traits
Saves: Fort +0, Ref +5, Will +4 Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +3
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 21, Con —, Int 10, Wis 19, Cha 15 Str 14, Dex 15, Con —, Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 17
Climate/Terrain: Any Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–6) Solitary, pair, or gang (3–4)
Challenge Rating: 1 3
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 2–3 HD (Small) 4 HD (Medium-size); 5–9 HD (Large)
Guttersnipe Shrapnyl
Medium-Size Construct Large Construct
Hit Dice: 8d10 (44 hp) 12d10 (66 hp)
Initiative: +1 +0
Speed: 20 ft., fly 20 ft. (clumsy) 20 ft., fly 10 ft. (clumsy)
AC: 21 (+1 Dex, +10 natural), 24 (–1 size, +15 natural),
touch 11, flat-footed 20 touch 9, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Slam +7 melee Slam +12 melee, or gore +12 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+1 Slam 1d8+4, gore 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Control host, glitterdust, improved grab, wrap Cloud of steel, control host, improved grab, wrap
Special Qualities: Construct traits, immunities Construct traits, vulnerability to shatter
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +3, Will +5 Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +8
Abilities: Str 13, Dex 13, Con —, Int 10, Wis 16, Cha 17 Str 18, Dex 11, Con —, Int 10, Wis 19, Cha 17
Climate/Terrain: Any Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–4) Solitary or pair
Challenge Rating: 5 7
Treasure: None None
Alignment: Always neutral Always neutral
Advancement: 9–16 HD (Medium-size); 17–24 HD (Large) 13–18 HD (Large); 19–36 HD (Huge)176
Immunity to Blunt Weapons (Ex): A tatterdemanimal
takes no damage from bludgeoning weapons.
COMMON
Scholars theorize that common raggamoffyns form from
enchanted gloves, robes, hats, and other magic clothing that
was lost or discarded by its owners. They are usually found
near cemeteries and places where magical battles have
recently transpired.
A common raggamoffyn looks like a suit of mismatched
clothing with no wearer. The clothing appears to be in good
repair, and it would probably still be usable if it could be separated from the construct.
Combat
A common raggamoffyn directs its host creature in combat.
It suffocates the host when it has either lost control over the
creature or has no further use for it.
Control Host (Su): The common raggamoffyn’s control
host ability has a Will save DC of 14.
Improved Grab (Ex): A common raggamoffyn’s grapple
bonus is +4.
Suffocate (Ex): A common raggamoffyn can asphyxiate a
wrapped creature by drawing the air from its lungs. This
attack automatically deals 1d4 points of damage per round.
GUTTERSNIPE
Guttersnipes are most prevalent around settlements of
dwarves, gnomes, and halflings. They form from worn-out
and discarded adventuring and construction gear.
A guttersnipe appears as a whirling mound of frayed rope,
worn leather pieces, strings, belts, and swatches of cloth.
Within this mass of material is a core made of small gems,
bits of glass, and glitter.
Combat
Guttersnipes are content to lie in wait for suitable hosts.
They save their glitterdust ability to dazzle foes when they
need to escape.
Control Host (Su): The guttersnipe’s control host ability
has a Will save DC of 17.
Glitterdust (Sp): Once per day, a guttersnipe can use glitterdust (caster level 5th; save DC 15).
Improved Grab (Ex): A guttersnipe’s grapple bonus is +7.
Immunities (Ex): Guttersnipes are immune to spell
effects that produce light or darkness.
SHRAPNYL
Shrapnyls are the only raggamoffyns made entirely of metal.
They lurk near battlegrounds as well as forges.
A shrapnyl consists of bits of metal in every size. Its
appearance can vary greatly—one might consist of swords,
shields, and cooking gear, while another could contain a
helm, coins, chains, and keys.
COMBAT
Shrapnyls are the most aggressive of the raggamoffyns. They
do not hesitate to use their cloud of steel attack when faced
with an overwhelming situation.
Cloud of Steel (Ex): Once per day, a shrapnyl can
explode into a deadly cloud of flying, sharp debris. Every
creature within a 10-foot spread centered on the shrapnyl
takes 4d10 points of damage (Reflex DC 16 half ). This attack
instantly frees a creature wrapped by the shrapnyl from its
control, and the wrapped creature takes no damage from
that cloud of steel attack.
Control Host (Su): A shrapnyl’s control host ability has a
Will save DC of 19.
Improved Grab (Ex): A shrapnyl’s grapple bonus is +17.
Vulnerability to Shatter: The shatter spell deals 3d6 points
of damage to a shrapnyl.
RAGGAMOFFYN
Common Shrapnyl Guttersnipe TatterdemanimalRAMPAGER
Large Beast
Hit Dice: 14d10+70 (147 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 23 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +12 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 21
Attacks: 2 claws +14 melee and bite +9 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+5 plus 1d6 acid, bite 2d6+2 plus
poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Acid, armor damage, fear aura, poison
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60-ft., low-light vision,
scent
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +11, Will +6
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 15, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
Skills: Spot +12
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and
warm deserts, plains, and hills
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 15–25 HD
(Large); 26–35 HD (Huge)
Rampagers (sometimes called
“so-ut,” their goblin name) are
vicious, nocturnal predators
that live only to destroy and
kill. Oddly, their armor, weaponry, and aggressiveness go far
beyond the levels necessary to
bring down food. In fact, rampagers enjoy killing, and they
usually kill far more than they
can eat. In fact, as long as prey
is available, a rampager doesn’t
even stop killing long enough
to feed.
A rampager stands taller
than a man (8 to 10 feet high). Its
body, a solid knot of muscle, is covered with an extremely tough, scaly
hide. The monster has no head as such;
its face juts out from the forward
edge of its body. Two bone-white
eyes peer out from the scaly mass
above the gaping, fang-filled mouth. From behind the face
jut two muscular arms, each of which ends in two long,
hooked claws. The four thick, stumplike legs are similar to
those of an elephant, and a triangular, muscular tail drags
behind the monster. A rampager has very poor hearing,
but its scent ability makes up for that lack.
COMBAT
Something about metal drives a rampager mad. It attacks
creatures wearing metal armor before anyone or anything
else. Once all such targets are dead, it turns its attention to
those wielding metal weapons. After all the metal nearby
is demolished, the rampager starts on the largest structures in the area, ignoring even creatures that are attacking it in favor of demolishing a building (though it does
defend itself once it has lost more than half of its original
hit points). Only after all nearby built-up structures have
been leveled does it finally turn against unarmored heroes
or townspeople.
Acid (Ex): The acid that coats a rampager’s claws not
only deals extra damage on successful attacks, it also dissolves an opponent’s armor and clothing, making those
items useless in 1 round unless the wearer succeeds at a
Reflex save (DC 22). Success indicates that the affected
equipment can be saved by washing it within 1 minute.
Washing requires a full-round action
and at least 1 pint of water.
Armor Damage (Ex): A rampager’s teeth can catch and tear
an opponent’s armor. If the opponent has both armor and a shield,
roll 1d6: A roll of 1–4 affects the
armor and a roll of 5–6 affects
the shield. Make a grapple check
(grapple bonus +19) whenever
the rampager hits with a bite
attack, adding to the opponent’s
roll any bonus for the armor or
shield because of magic. If the
rampager wins, the affected
armor or shield is torn away
and ruined.
Fear Aura (Ex): Each creature that is the target of a rampager’s attack or is within 30 feet
of such a target must succeed at a
Will saving throw (DC 17) or
become shaken. A shaken creature
that is still within 30 feet of the
rampager on its next turn must
make a second Will saving throw
(DC 17) to avoid becoming frightened (same penalties as shaken;
must flee until beyond the 30-foot
radius of the effect).
Poison (Ex): A rampager’s acidic saliva acts as a weak
poison (Fortitude DC 22) with each successful bite attack.
The initial damage is 1 point of Strength damage, and the
secondary damage is 1d4 points of Strength damage.
Scent (Ex): A rampager can detect approaching enemies,
sniff out hidden foes, and track by sense of smell.
177
RAMPAGER178
REASON STEALER
Medium-Size Ooze
Hit Dice: 5d10+15 (42 hp)
Initiative: –5
Speed: 10 ft., climb 10 ft.
AC: 5 (–5 Dex), touch 5, flat-footed 5
Attacks: Slam +5 melee, or weapon +5 melee and slam
+0 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+3 (primary), by weapon +3, slam 1d6+1
(secondary)
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Devour mind, improved grab
Special Qualities: Blindsight 60 ft., DR 20/+1, grotesque
form, ooze traits
Saves: Fort +2, Ref –4, Will –4
Abilities: Str 14, Dex 1, Con 12, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 6–10 HD (Medium-size); 11–15 HD (Large)
The reason stealer is a relentless, subterranean killer
that murders other creatures to steal their intelligence. Reason stealers live below ground but
make their way to the surface to hunt.
In its normal form, a reason stealer is a
4-foot-diameter puddle of grainy, brownish-yellow slime. If it has recently fed
upon a creature possessing some
form of intelligence, it can roughly
mimic its victim’s shape. Such
an assumed form is misshapen
and blobby, and it only vaguely
resembles the creature that the
reason stealer killed.
A reason stealer doesn’t speak
any language. When
it steals a creature’s
mind, it randomly
mumbles words in that
creature’s language.
COMBAT
A reason stealer lashes out at prey with a sticky pseudopod. Upon delivering the death blow to a foe with its
pseudopod, it steals the opponent’s intellect. Once a
reason stealer gains a modicum of sentience, it becomes a
far deadlier opponent because it can use all the skills,
feats, and spells it has absorbed from its prey. Sentient
reason stealers ceaselessly search for new prey because
they are desperate to avoid returning to their previous
mindless state.
Devour Mind (Su): A reason stealer transfers an opponent’s Intelligence score to itself upon dealing it a killing
blow with a slam attack. This process also heals the monster of 5 points of damage per point of Intelligence gained.
Upon devouring a mind, the reason stealer has access to
any of the dead opponent’s other ability scores, skill ranks,
base attack bonus, and base save bonuses, and it can use
any of these characteristics that are higher than its own. It
also gains the use of the opponent’s feats and any prepared
arcane spells. The reason stealer understands that it must
remove spell components from a victim’s body to cast
spells. All these acquired features last for 24 hours. If a
reason stealer devours the mind of a victim while it still
has the abilities of a previous one, it uses the higher of the
two (the new victim’s or its current value) for ability scores,
base attack bonus, base save bonuses, and skill ranks. It
also gains any feats and spells possessed by the new victim
that it did not already have.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a reason stealer hits an opponent that is its own size or smaller with a slam attack, it
deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a
free action without provoking an attack of opportunity
(grapple bonus +9, including a +4 racial bonus on grapple
attacks from the sticky substance that covers its pseudopod). If it gets a hold, it has the option to conduct the
grapple normally, or simply use its pseudopod to
hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the reason stealer is not considered
grappled). In either case, each successful
grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals slam
damage.
Blindsight (Ex): A reason
stealer is blind, but its entire
body is a primitive sensory
organ that can ascertain prey
by scent and vibration.
This ability enables it
to discern
objects and
creatures within 60 feet. A
reason stealer usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice
creatures within range of its blindsight.
Grotesque Form (Su): A reason stealer that has devoured
the mind of a creature with an Intelligence score of 1 or
higher can shape its body into a bizarre reflection of that
creature. If the reason stealer has abilities gained from
more than one creature, it assumes a form similar to the
last one it killed. A reason stealer with a humanoid form can
wield weapons, using the fighting skills of any victims it
devoured. It always retains one pseudopod with which to
attack. A reason stealer can maintain a grotesque form as
long as it has an Intelligence score.
REASON
STEALEROoze Traits: A reason stealer is immune to mindaffecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.
RED SUNDEW
Huge Plant
Hit Dice: 15d8+75 (142 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 11 (–2 size, –1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 11
Attacks: 4 slams +18 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+9 plus acid
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, sticky acid
Special Qualities: Immunities, plant traits, woodsense
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +4, Will +6
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 8, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm forests
Organization: Solitary or patch (2–5)
Challenge Rating: 13
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 16–28 HD (Huge); 29–45 HD (Gargantuan)
Red sundews are vicious, migratory predators
that roam forested areas hunting for
unwary prey. Unlike many
carnivorous plants, the red
sundew is highly nomadic,
so it rarely remains
in one geographic
area for long.
Though they are
found primarily in
coastal forests and
hot jungles, red sundews can also inhabit cooler woodlands far from these
wet areas.
A red sundew
measures almost
20 feet high and
10 feet across. Its
body looks like a wide mound of tangled,
ropy rags in red, green, and rust colors. These
“rags” are actually ropelike vines coated with a sweetsmelling goo, which gives the plant a slick, wet appearance.
Underneath the mass of vines, a red sundew has a single
stem that measures about 12 feet high and 5 feet across. This
stem is supported by two leglike appendages.
A red sundew begins digesting its prey during combat,
smearing the sticky acid that coats its entire body over its
opponent. Once the opponent dies, the red sundew uses its
tentacles to draw the corpse inside its body mass, where it
continues the digestion process.
COMBAT
Red sundews are aggressive hunters. They attack with
their tentacles, wrapping them firmly around prey to prevent escape while the sticky acid that coats their tentacles
begins the digestion process. Multiple red sundews often
travel together and combine their efforts while hunting.
These carnivorous plants flee when more than half their
number has been slain.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a red sundew hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself
with a slam attack, it deals normal damage and attempts
to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +28). If it gets a
hold, it has the option to conduct the grapple normally,
or simply use its tentacle to hold the opponent (–20
penalty on grapple check, but the red sundew is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple
check it makes during successive rounds automatically
deals slam damage.
Sticky Acid (Ex): A red sundew is coated with a thick,
acidic goo. Any creature or object that makes physical
contact with the monster is smeared with this sticky
acid, which deals 1d6 points of acid damage per
round until removed. Thus, any successful hit
from or against the red sundew automatically deals acid damage to the opponent or the opponent’s weapon,
depending upon the point of
contact. Sticky acid remains
on a creature or object for
1d4+1 rounds. It cannot be scraped off, but
it can be washed off
with a full-round action and at least 1
gallon of water.
Immunities
(Ex): Red sundews are immune to fire
and acid.
Plant Traits
(Ex): A red sundew is
immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical
hits or mind-affecting effects. The creature also has lowlight vision.
Woodsense (Ex): A red sundew can automatically sense
the location of anything within 60 feet that is in contact
with vegetation, even objects or creatures that are not in
contact with the same vegetation as itself.
179
RED SUNDEW180
ROGUE EIDOLON
Large Construct
Hit Dice: 9d10 (49 hp)
Initiative: +0
Speed: 30 ft. (can’t run)
AC: 21 (–1 size, +12 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 21
Attacks: 2 slams +10 melee
Damage: Slam 2d6+5
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Blood spray, confusion
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 20/+2, SR 19
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +1
Abilities: Str 21, Dex 11, Con —, Int 2, Wis 6, Cha 13
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: 10–18 HD (Large); 19–27 HD (Huge)
Many centuries ago, hidden cults of various dark gods
created large statues in the images of their leaders. The faces of these statues were left blank,
except for the symbols of their deities, to indicate each god’s mastery over its followers.
These statues were placed at honored locations
in temples where they presided over countless
sacrifices.
A dark deity that was especially pleased with a
particular cult cell sometimes sent the tiniest
shred of its power across the dimensions to
infuse that cult’s statue, granting it minimal
sentience. Over the years, these divinely
powered constructs went insane,
becoming rogue eidolons consumed with murderous rage.
Most of them destroyed the cults
over which they presided, down to
the last member, then went on to find
other victims.
A rogue eidolon is typically 12 to 14 feet
tall and usually has a humanoid shape. It is
always constructed of purple stone (often
magically treated to achieve that distinctive color), and its hands are pitch
black. Its face is blank except for a
crude symbol or rune (the symbol of
an evil deity) carved into the otherwise
featureless visage. This symbol leaks a
thick, viscous fluid that looks like
blood and has a sharp, metallic odor.
Drops of this disgusting fluid evaporate within minutes of falling to the
ground, leaving vivid red stains where
they fell. Beyond that, one rogue eidolon differs wildly
from the next in appearance, though most are badly weathered and possess monstrous deformities, such as horns, a
hunched back, tumorous lumps, or misshapen limbs.
COMBAT
A rogue eidolon usually attacks any living creature it
encounters, but the nature of its insanity makes it completely unpredictable. Occasionally a rogue eidolon simply
ignores intruders, perhaps believing them to be loyal cult
members or simply animals unworthy of its attention. At
other times, it may attack and even pursue the same group,
believing its members to be infidels and enemies.
The monster attacks by smashing victims with its stony
fists. Tactics mean little to it, and its attacks are so singleminded that it often ignores easier targets once it has
selected a victim.
Blood Spray (Su): As a free action, a rogue eidolon can
spew a gout of thick blood from the seeping symbol in its
face at a single target within 30 feet. Any creature struck
by this blood must make a Will save (DC 15) or be
afflicted with a terrible madness that causes it to see all its
friends as hated enemies. An affected creature immediately attacks its closest ally, using the best tactics
and items at its disposal. This murderous frenzy
prevents spellcasting but not the activation of
magic items that require spell completion, and it
lasts for 3d6 rounds. Once a rogue eidolon has used
its blood spray, it must wait 1d4 rounds before it can do
so again.
Confusion (Sp): Any creature struck by a
rogue eidolon must make a Will save (DC 15) or
become confused. This condition is permanent;
only a greater restoration, limited wish, miracle, or
wish spell can restore the subject to
normal. The effect is otherwise
identical with that of a confusion
spell (caster level 10th).
Construct Traits: A rogue eidolon is immune to mind-affecting effects,
poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, necromantic effects, and
any effect that requires a Fortitude
save unless it also works on objects.
The creature is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability
damage, ability drain, energy drain,
or death from massive damage. It
cannot heal itself but can be healed
through repair. It cannot be raised or
resurrected. A rogue eidolon has darkvision (60-foot range).
ROGUE
EIDOLONRUKARAZYLL
Large Outsider (Earth, Evil)
Hit Dice: 12d8+48 (102 hp)
Initiative: +8
Speed: 70 ft., climb 50 ft.
AC: 23 (–1 size, +8 Dex, +3 natural, +3 profane), touch 20,
flat-footed 12
Attacks: 3 tendrils +19 melee and bite +4 melee, or spit
ooze +19 ranged
Damage: Tendril 1d6–2, bite 1d6–2 plus 2d4 acid
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Fungus, spell-like abilities, spit ooze
Special Qualities: DR 20/+2, evasion, outsider traits,
profane alacrity, SR 23
Saves: Fort +12, Ref +16, Will +11
Abilities: Str 6, Dex 27, Con 19, Int 18, Wis 17, Cha 18
Skills: Balance +22, Bluff +19, Climb +6, Concentration
+14, Diplomacy +8, Disguise +19, Escape Artist +16,
Forgery +9, Hide +14, Intimidate +19, Jump +0,
Knowledge (religion) +12, Search +9, Sense Motive +18,
Spellcraft +12, Spot +8, Tumble +23
Feats: Expertise, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip,
Weapon Finesse (tendril)
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary, pair, or cell (3–12)
Challenge Rating: 14
Treasure: Double standard
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 13–24 HD (Large); 25–36 HD
(Huge)
Rukarazylls are consummate deceivers and
tricksters. When summoned to the Material
Plane (usually from the Elemental Plane
of Earth), they delight in
masquerading as charismatic
men or women. In such guises,
they often attempt to convince
locals to establish cults dedicated
to apparently benign (but
altogether fabricated)
minor deities. Over
time, the rukarazyll
slowly perverts the followers of such cults to
the worship of an evil deity.
When it doesn’t have the time
or resources to seed cults, a
rukarazyll contents itself
with selling cursed
items that it
passes off as
beneficial, or posing
as a priest and inflicting
diseases on those seeking healing, or pursuing other
underhanded and cruel tricks.
In its true form, a rukarazyll is a loathsome creature. Its
body is a bulbous mass of seething fungoid matter, studded with eyes and gasping orifices that leak stinking,
black drool. It has six long, hook-studded tendrils that
extrude from various random points on its body. Three of
these tendrils serve as legs; the other three serve as hands.
Extending from the top of the body is a long scaly tentacle, atop which sits a head that resembles a ram’s skull,
complete with horns. Great fangs stud the rukarazyll’s lipless mouth, from which bubbling acidic froth constantly
dribbles. Writhing nests of pale fungal filaments fill its
eye sockets, and more of these filaments grow out of other
random spots all over its body. The monster’s natural voice
is thick and gurgling, as if its throat were partially clogged
with mud, but it can disguise its voice as well as its body
when it adopts another form.
COMBAT
The rukarazyll is physically weak, but it makes up for its
lack of strength with speed and accuracy granted by the
unholy energy it channels. It enjoys melee combat so
much that it often forgoes its spell-like abilities if a chance
to fight presents itself.
Combat with a rukarazyll is both disorienting and terrifying. As a full attack action, the monster can strike with three
of its tendrils and bite with its acidic jaws. It takes full
advantage of its feats, using Expertise to best
effect and Improved Trip and Improved
Disarm as opportunities arise. It also relies
on its Tumble skill to avoid drawing
attacks of opportunity as it weaves about.
Fungus (Su): Any living creature struck
by a rukarazyll’s melee attack must make a
Fortitude saving throw (DC
20) or become infested
with the fecund fungus that grows on the
monster’s body. Infestation requires 1 round for a
Small or smaller creature or
1d4 rounds for a Mediumsize creature. Each size category larger than Mediumsize adds an extra 1d4 rounds
to the infestation
time. An affected
creature can free
itself of the fungus
before infestation is
complete with either a
remove disease spell or
by taking 10 points of fire
or cold damage.
181
RUKARAZYLL
DR182
Once infestation is complete, the fibrous white filaments begin to seethe and twist in the host’s body, actively
trying to resist any actions the host attempts. Because of
this, the host incurs a –2 penalty on all attack rolls, Dexterity-based skill checks, and Reflex saving throws. In
addition, the fungus continues to grow in the host’s body
(albeit at a much slower rate), dealing 1 point of Charisma
drain per day. A host whose Charisma reaches 0 becomes
unconscious, and within 1 hour his or her body transforms into an immobile heap of fungus that lives for 3d6
weeks before perishing. Any creature that comes into contact with one of these transformed bodies must make a
successful Fortitude saving throw (DC 20) or become
infested, with the same onset time and effects as infestation from the rukarazyll itself. A remove disease spell given
after infestation is complete destroys the fungus but does
not restore lost Charisma.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—alter self, blur, cat’s grace,
darkness, desecrate, detect good, detect magic, entangle, mirror
image, plant growth, protection from good, snare, telekinesis, teleport without error (self plus 50 pounds of objects only), undetectable alignment; 3/day—polymorph self, unhallow, unholy
blight; 1/day—command plants, contagion, heal, wall of thorns.
Caster level 12th; save DC 14 + spell level.
Spit Ooze (Su): Once every 10 minutes, a rukarazyll
can expel a Medium-size gray ooze (see the Monster
Manual) from its mouth as a grenadelike weapon
with a 10-foot range increment. If it hits a target,
the gray ooze can immediately attempt to use
its improved grab ability and constrict if it gets
a hold. If the attack misses, determine miss
distance and direction normally. The ooze then
moves to attack in the next round. Gray oozes
created in this manner live only 2d4 rounds, dissolving into pools of gray goo when that duration expires.
Evasion (Ex): If exposed to any effect that
normally allows a Reflex save for half damage, a
rukarazyll takes no damage on a successful save.
Outsider Traits: A rukarazyll has darkvision (60-
foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Profane Alacrity (Su): A rukarazyll is infused with
an unholy energy that grants it improved reflexes and
speed. This energy gives the monster a +3 profane
bonus to AC and allows it to take 10 on Balance,
Escape Artist, and Tumble checks in any circumstance. Once per hour, a rukarazyll can call upon its
profane alacrity ability to gain a temporary boost to its
movement, doubling both its speed and the profane
bonus to its AC for 1 minute. Afterward, the rukarazyll’s profane energy is depleted for 1 hour. During
this period, it has no profane bonus to AC and cannot take 10 on Balance, Escape Artist, or Tumble
checks except in circumstances that would ordinarily allow it.
RUNIC GUARDIAN
Large Construct
Hit Dice: 17d10 (93 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 28 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +18 natural), touch 10, flatfooted 27
Attacks: Slam +18/+13/+8 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+10 plus stunning strike
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Runic spells, stunning strike
Special Qualities: Construct traits, DR 30/+3, fast
healing 10, find master, guard, shield master, teleport
without error
Saves: Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +5
Abilities: Str 24, Dex 13, Con —, Int —, Wis 11, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any land or underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 18–25 HD (Large); 26–51 HD (Huge)
Runic guardians are constructs similar to shield guardians
(see the Monster Manual), but with far superior physical
and magical capabilities. Runic guardians are especially popular among dwarves and giants, though
spellcasters of all races find them useful.
A runic guardian is a massive, human-shaped
figure made of stone, steel, and lead. Its hands and
arms are constructed of hollow stone and filled with
lead for a more deadly punch. Carved, magic runes
inlaid with precious metals adorn its head, limbs and
torso. Whenever a runic guardian casts a spell, these
runes flare up into a variety of brilliant colors.
A runic guardian serves one master that is designated at the time of its creation, and no other. The
construct is keyed to a specific, unique piece of jewelry (normally a ring or amulet) worn by its master
and made at the time of its creation. The master can
use this piece of jewelry to call the runic guardian to
his or her side from any distance, or even from
another plane. A runic guardian knows whether
or not the bearer of its jewelry is really its
master, and it slays any pretenders outright.
COMBAT
In battle, a runic guardian protects its master by
casting predetermined defensive spells upon him
or her, then pounding away at foes with its leaden fists.
Runic guardians equipped with offensive spells use them
only when directly commanded to do so. A runic
guardian is instantly aware of its master’s death, whether
or not it was present at the time. When the master’s death
RUNIC
GUARDIANoccurs, the construct immediately goes on a rampage,
attacking all creatures within sight. Possession of its jewelry in such a circumstance gains the bearer neither control over the construct nor safety from its attacks. The
runic guardian does not stop until destroyed.
Runic Spells (Sp): A runic guardian can hold up to six
spells. These spells must be cast into its body when it is created. One spell can be placed on the runic guardian’s head,
one on each limb, and one on its torso. The table below
gives the maximum level of spell that each of its body parts
can hold. Alternatively, the entire guardian can accommodate a single inscribed spell of 6th or 7th level, but this
covers its whole body.
Body Part Highest Spell Level
Head 1st
Each arm 2nd
Each leg 3rd
Torso 5th
Each of these spells
is usable once per
day as a spell-like
ability. The runic
guardian discharges
a spell either when
directly commanded to do so
or when a predetermined situation arises.
Stunning Strike (Ex): Any
creature hit by a runic guardian’s slam attack must make a successful Fortitude saving throw
(DC 25) or be stunned (unable to
act, loses any Dexterity bonus to AC,
and an attacker gets a +2 bonus on
attack rolls against it) for 1 round, in addition to taking the normal damage from the blow.
Constructs, oozes, plants, undead, incorporeal creatures, and creatures immune to critical hits cannot
be stunned.
Construct Traits: A runic guardian is immune to
mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromantic effects, and
any effect that requires a Fortitude save unless it also
works on objects. The creature is not subject to critical
hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability drain,
energy drain, or death from massive damage. It cannot
heal itself but can be healed through repair. It cannot be
raised or resurrected. A runic guardian has darkvision
(60-foot range).
Fast Healing (Ex): A runic guardian regains lost hit
points at the rate of 10 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the runic guardian to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Find Master (Su): No matter the distance, a runic
guardian can find the piece of jewelry that connects it
with its master, and it teleports to that spot when called.
(Should the master call the construct and then remove
the jewelry, the runic guardian finds only the jewelry
upon its arrival.) This ability functions even across planar
boundaries.
Guard (Ex): The runic guardian blocks blows, granting
its master a +4 deflection bonus to AC. This power functions
only when the runic guardian is within 5 feet of its master.
Shield Master (Sp): A runic guardian’s master, when in
possession of the keyed piece of jewelry, can activate this
defensive ability when within 150 feet of the construct.
Shield master transfers three-fourths of the damage that
would otherwise be dealt to the master to the runic
guardian instead. This ability otherwise functions like the
shield other spell (caster level 25th), except that it
provides no AC or saving throw bonuses.
Teleport without Error (Sp): Once per
day, a runic guardian
can use teleport without error (caster level
18th). It normally uses
this ability to answer a call
from its master, teleporting
unerringly to his or her side.
CONSTRUCTION
The process for creating a runic
guardian is nearly identical with
that for creating a shield guardian.
A runic guardian costs 200,000 gp to
create. This price includes the construct’s physical body, the keyed piece of
jewelry, and all the materials and spell components that are consumed or become a permanent part of the guardian.
Creating the body requires a successful Profession (engineer) or Craft (sculpting) check (DC 20).
The creation of the keyed jewelry item requires a successful Craft (metalworking) check (DC 15). This
jewelry is always made of the same metals and other
materials as the guardian’s runes.
After the body and jewelry are constructed, the
creature must be animated through magical rites that
require one month to complete. The creator must be at
least 16th level and have the Craft Wondrous Item feat.
The creator must cast any spells he or she wishes to
place on the runic guardian personally at this time,
though they may come from an outside source such as
a scroll. The creator must labor for at least 8 hours per
day in a specially prepared workroom or laboratory that
costs 2,000 gp to establish.
183
RUNIC
GUARDIAN184
SHADOW SPIDER
Huge Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 13d10+65 (136 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft., climb 30 ft.
AC: 13 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 12
Attacks: 4 claws +19 melee and bite +17 melee
Damage: 4 claws 2d4+8, bite 2d6+4 plus paralysis
Space/Reach: 15 ft. by 15 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, paralysis, silk slick
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 15/+1, low-light
vision, shadow walk, SR 23
Saves: Fort +13, Ref +11, Will +5
Abilities: Str 26, Dex 13, Con 20, Int 5, Wis 13, Cha 8
Skills: Climb +21, Hide –2*, Listen +5, Spot +6
Feats: Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes, Multiattack
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 14–26 HD (Huge); 27–39 HD
(Gargantuan)
Shadow spiders are carnivorous ambush predators from the
Plane of Shadow that prefer to hunt on the Material Plane.
They possess frightening intelligence and cunning.
A shadow spider is a huge, shadowy arachnid. It has a
5-foot-diameter body and stands roughly 2 1/2 feet tall.
Its eight eyes are such a deep red color that they appear black.
A shadow spider maintains a larder (actually a
pocket in the Plane of Shadow) stacked with the
desiccated corpses of its prey. The monster never
carries treasure; it simply leaves its victims’ possessions on the corpses. When its larder becomes
overfilled, the shadow spider abandons it and
finds a new one to fill with food.
Shadow spiders speak Common.
COMBAT
A shadow spider prepares elaborate traps
for its victims in dungeons and caverns.
It uses its silk slick ability to make a slope
or stair slippery, then waits in the shadows at the bottom. When a creature falls,
the shadow spider steps out of the shadows and attempts to grab its prey with its
four foreclaws. If successful, the monster
uses shadow walk to carry the victim to its
larder in the Plane of Shadow. Once there,
the shadow spider paralyzes and abandons
that creature, then returns to its trap for
more prey. Only when there are no more
creatures, or it is in danger of dying, does a shadow spider
return to its larder and begin eating. Shadow spiders never
clean up their traps, so adventurers occasionally get forewarning of one from the dropped items (belongings of past
victims) that litter the area.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a shadow spider hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself
with two claw attacks, it deals normal damage and attempts
to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an
attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +29). If it gets a hold,
it has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply
use two claws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple
check, but the shadow spider is not considered grappled).
In either case, each successful grapple check it makes
during successive rounds automatically deals damage for
two claw attacks.
Paralysis (Ex): A shadow spider’s teeth are coated
with a paralyzing fluid. Any creature hit by its bite must
make a successful Fortitude save (DC 21) or be paralyzed
for 4 rounds.
Silk Slick (Su): As a full-round action, a shadow spider
can spray a layer of spider silk over any solid surface. It can
cover up to 100 square feet with this substance, which dries
and evaporates in 13 rounds. The slick silk functions in all
other respects like a grease spell (caster level 13th; Reflex
save DC 21).
Shadow Walk (Sp): At will, a shadow spider can use shadow
walk (caster level 10th; Will save DC 16).
Skills: *A shadow spider gets a +20 circumstance bonus
on Hide checks when in shadows.
SHADOW
SPIDERSIRINE
Medium-Size Fey (Aquatic)
Hit Dice: 4d6 (14 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 30 ft., swim 60 ft.
AC: 17 (+4 Dex, +3 deflection), touch 17, flat-footed 13
Attacks: Short sword +2 melee, or touch +2
melee touch
Damage: Short sword 1d6/19–20,
touch 1d4 Int
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Charming song,
Intelligence damage, spell-like
abilities
Special Qualities: Deflection,
low-light vision, soothing
touch
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +8, Will +7
Abilities: Str 10, Dex 18, Con 11,
Int 13, Wis 16, Cha 17
Skills: Animal Empathy +10,
Concentration +7, Heal +10,
Hide +11, Perform (dancing,
singing, plus one other)
+14, Swim +15, Wilderness
Lore +10
Feats: Dodge, Expertise
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm
aquatic
Organization: Solitary or family (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size)
Sirines are playful, gregarious creatures that love to sing,
swim, dance, and laugh. They frequently draw strangers into
their games and parties, but they rarely grant such visitors
more than a few hours of their time.
A sirine appears to be a normal human woman in most
respects, although its skin often has a noticeable yellow or
green tinge. The hair can be any normal, human hair color,
or it can be lustrous silver or dark green. A sirine wears only
lightweight clothing while on land and often nothing at all
while in the water. The typical sirine carries a short sword or
dagger at all times.
Although sirines are always happy to have fun with
strangers, they are extremely reclusive about their communities. They take care to seek camaraderie only when away
from their homes, and then only for a short while. Any creature that follows a sirine home, or stumbles upon that location accidentally, is likely to come under attack.
After a few hours, most sirines have had enough of the
companionship of other creatures, so they slip away, usually
by diving underwater. For a stranger, and particularly a
male, earning the trust of a sirine is nearly impossible.
These creatures trust no one except other sirines, though
in time of need they do accept any offered aid. Such assistance does not earn the giver any more of a sirine’s company than would otherwise have been bestowed, however, nor does the creature feel obligated to reward its
benefactor in any way. Occasionally a sirine bestows
a gift, usually a small gem, seashell, or other trinket, on an admirer who has been particularly
charming company.
COMBAT
Sirines are not especially tough in a standup fight, but they excel at evading and
escaping from enemies. They rarely let
themselves get drawn into battle unless
their homes are threatened. Instead,
they use their spell-like abilities and
special attacks to slip away, or use a combination of singing and Intelligence
drain to incapacitate foes and then
dump them far away where they can
cause no harm.
Approxmiately one-third
of all sirines are proficient
with bows, javelins, or slings.
About one in ten sirines has
a magic weapon, usually a javelin of lightning.
Charming Song (Sp): At will, a sirine can sing a special
song that functions like a charm person spell (caster level
2nd; save DC 14), except that it lasts for 11 hours and affects
every creature that hears it.
Intelligence Damage (Su): Any creature hit by a sirine’s
touch attack takes 1d4 points of Intelligence damage (or
2d4 points on a critical hit).
Spell-Like Abilities: 1/day—fog cloud, improved invisibility, polymorph self. Caster level 11th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Deflection (Su): A sirine is surrounded by an aura that
grants it a deflection bonus to AC equal to its Charisma bonus.
Soothing Touch (Su): A sirine, if it desires, can use its
touch to restore 1d6 points of Intelligence damage caused
by any sirine.
Skills: A sirine receives a +8 racial bonus on Perform
checks.
185
SIRINE
DC186
SPAWN OF KYUSS
Medium-Size Undead
Hit Dice: 4d12+3 (29 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 11 (–1 Dex, +2 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 11
Attacks: Slam +6 melee, or touch +6 melee touch, or
Kyuss’s gift +1 ranged touch
Damage: Slam 1d6+6 and Kyuss’s gift
Special Attacks: Create spawn, fear aura, Kyuss’s gift
Special Qualities: Curative transformation, fast healing 5,
turn resistance +2, undead traits
Saves: Fort +1, Ref +0, Will +4
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 9, Con —, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 15
Skills: Hide +5, Jump +10, Move Silently +5, Spot +6
Feats: Toughness
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, shamble (3–4), or
horde (3–4 plus 1–6 Huge or larger zombies)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 5–8 HD (Medium-size);
9–12 HD (Large)
Spawn of Kyuss are disgusting undead
creatures created by Kyuss, a powerful
evil cleric turned demigod. Completely mad, the spawn of Kyuss
wander caverns, crypts, and sometimes the open countryside searching for victims.
A spawn of Kyuss looks like a
well-rotted zombie. Only once
the monster is within 20 feet
do the writhing, green worms
crawling in and out of its skull orifices become apparent. A spawn of
Kyuss is usually clad in rotted clothing, though a rare few wear
decaying pieces of armor.
A cleric of 16th level or higher
may use a create greater undead
spell to create new spawn of Kyuss.
This process requires maggots from the
corpse of a diseased creature in addition to the normal
material components.
Spawn of Kyuss split into multiple smaller groups when
creating their own spawn, and it is rare to encounter more
than three of them together. Occasionally a larger creature
falls under the curse of a spawn of Kyuss and follows it as a
normal zombie (see below).
COMBAT
Unlike zombies, spawn of Kyuss are not limited to partial
actions, and they are intelligent enough to pretend that they
have restricted movement until ready to attack. They normally use their fear auras to scatter victims, then gang up on
individuals until they have caught all opponents.
Create Spawn (Su): Once per round as a free action, a
spawn of Kyuss can transfer a worm from its own body to
that of an opponent. It can do this whenever it hits with a
slam attack, but it can also make the transfer by means of a
successful melee touch attack or a ranged touch attack, hurling a worm at a foe from a distance of up to 10 feet.
Each worm is a Fine vermin with AC 10 and 1 hit point.
It can be killed with normal damage or by the touch of
silver. On the spawn’s next action, the worm burrows into
its host’s flesh. (A creature with a natural armor bonus of +5
or higher is immune to this burrowing effect.) The worm
makes its way toward the host’s brain, dealing 1 point of
damage per round for 1d4+1 rounds. At the end of that
period, it reaches the brain. While the worm is inside a
victim, a remove curse or remove disease effect destroys it,
and a dispel evil or neutralize poison effect delays its
progress for 10d6 minutes. A successful Heal check (DC
20) extracts the worm and kills it.
Once the worm reaches the brain, it deals 1d2 points
of Intelligence damage per round until it either is
killed (by remove curse or remove
disease) or slays its host
(death occurs at 0 Intelligence). A Small, Mediumsize, or Large creature slain
by a worm rises as a new spawn
of Kyuss 1d6+4 rounds later;
a Tiny or smaller creature
quickly putrefies; and a
Huge or larger creature becomes a normal zombie of the
appropriate size. Newly created
spawn are not under the control
of their parent, but they usually
follow whatever spawn of
Kyuss created them.
Fear Aura (Su): A spawn of Kyuss continuously radiates a fear effect. This ability functions like a fear spell (caster level 7th; Will
save DC 14), except that it affects all creatures within a
40-foot radius. Any creature that makes a successful saving
throw against the effect cannot be affected again by the fear
aura of that spawn of Kyuss for 24 hours.
Kyuss’s Gift (Su): Any creature hit by a spawn of
Kyuss’s slam attack must succeed at a Fortitude save (DC
12) or contract this supernatural disease. The incubation
period is 1 day, and the disease deals 1d6 points of Constitution damage and 1d4 points of Wisdom damage (see
Disease in Chapter 3 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
SPAWN
OF KYUSS
BSThese effects manifest as rotting flesh and dementia. An
affected creature gets only half the benefits of natural
and magical healing, though a cure disease effect removes
the affliction.
Curative Transformation (Ex): Any remove curse or
remove disease effect, or a more powerful version of either
of these effects, transforms a spawn of Kyuss into a normal zombie.
Fast Healing (Ex): A spawn of Kyuss regains lost hit
points at the rate of 5 per round. Fast healing does not
restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation,
and it does not allow the spawn of Kyuss
to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Turn Resistance (Ex): A spawn
of Kyuss is treated as an undead
with 6 Hit Dice for the purpose of turn, rebuke, command, and bolster attempts.
Undead Traits: A spawn of Kyuss
is immune to mind-affecting
effects, poison, sleep, paralysis,
stunning, disease, death effects,
necromantic effects, and any effect
that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects. It
is not subject to critical hits, subdual damage, ability damage, ability
drain, energy drain, or death from
massive damage. A spawn of Kyuss
cannot be raised, and resurrection
works only if it is willing. The creature
has darkvision (60-foot range).
SPELL WEAVER
Medium-Size Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 10d8–10 (36 hp)
Initiative: +3
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 18 (+3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 13,
flat-footed 15
Attacks: 2 slams +9
Damage: Slam 1d3–1
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities, spells
Special Qualities: Chromatic disk, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to mind effects,
shielded mind, spell weaving, SR 21, telepathy
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +10, Will +10
Abilities: Str 9, Dex 16, Con 9, Int 18, Wis 17, Cha 16
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) +13, Scry +14, Spellcraft +17,
Spot +12, Use Magic Device +15
Feats: Empower Spell, Enlarge Spell, Extend Spell,
Heighten Spell, Spell Focus (Abjuration), Spell Focus
(Evocation), Spell Penetration
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary or raid (3–6)
Challenge Rating: 10
Treasure: Double items (magic items only)
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–30 HD (Medium-size)
These creatures are enigmatic in the extreme. Outside of
the fact that they covet magic items, little is known about
them. Most encounters with spell weavers
occur when they attempt to purloin magic
items from other creatures.
A spell weaver is a scrawny, hairless, six-armed creaure about 5 feet
tall. It is humanoid in shape, with a
vaguely birdlike face and large, dark
eyes. A long neck allows it to twist
and turn its face in any direction.
Usually only one spell weaver is
encountered at a time, but occasionally these monsters organize themselves into a raiding party to seize a
particular item. Such a raid is
extremely well planned and is usually
the result of months of investigation conducted through a combination of scrying and simple
spying—an activity made easier by
the spell weaver’s invisibility power.
Spell weavers do not communicate
with anyone except their own kind.
This means, of course, that no one has
ever had a meaningful conversation
with a spell weaver, so nothing is
known about the background, motivations, or society of these creatures other
than what their actions reveal. Occasionally, for reasons that no one else understands, a spell weaver leaves a written
note where a humanoid can find it.
Such messages are invariably rambling and often completely incoherent,
so they usually raise more questions
than they answer.
Spell weavers do not speak, but they can
communicate with one another telepathically across a distance of 1,000 miles.
COMBAT
A spell weaver is pathetically weak in melee but powerful in
magic. Its ability to cast multiple spells simultaneously
makes it a dangerous opponent indeed. A spell weaver usually remains invisible until it is ready to attack, then uses
plane shift to escape, hopefully in possession of the magic
item for which it came.
187
SPELL
WEAVER188
Spell-Like Abilities: Always active—see invisiblity; at
will—detect magic, invisibility; 1/day—plane shift. Caster
level equals spell weaver’s effective sorcerer level; save DC
13 + spell level.
Spells: A spell weaver casts spells as a sorcerer two levels
higher than its Hit Dice. (That is, a spell weaver with 10 Hit
Dice casts spells as a 12th-level sorcerer; spells known
9/5/5/4/3/2/1; spells/day 6/7/7/7/6/5/3; save DC 13 +
spell level, or 15 + spell level for Abjuration and Evocation
spells.) A spell weaver prefers combinations of spells that
focus on attacks, defense, and transportation.
Chromatic Disk: A spell weaver is never without its
chromatic disk. This 6-inch-diameter indestructible disk
glows with colors that slowly shift through the spectrum.
This object stores ten additional spell levels of energy
that the creature can tap and use as it wishes—the spell
weaver could, for example, cast two extra 5th-level spells
in a day, or three 3rd-level spells and one 1st-level spell,
or any other combination of extra spell levels that adds
up to ten, so long as no single spell is higher than 5th
level. (For this purpose, two 0-level spells are equivalent
to one 1st-level spell.) To tap this spell energy, a spell
weaver must hold the chromatic disk in at least one of its
hands. The disk automatically recharges itself to full
power every night, at midnight. A spell powered by the
disk is cast as though the caster had the Spell Focus feat
for the spell in question.
Only a spell weaver can utilize a chromatic disk. Should
any other creature pick one up and try to tap its energy (by
employing the Use Magic Device skill, for instance), it
explodes, dealing 4d10 points of damage to everything
within a 30-foot radius.
Immunity to Mind-Affecting Effects: Because its alien mind functions differently than those of other
creatures, a spell weaver is immune to all mind-affecting spells
and effects.
Shielded Mind (Ex): Attempts by creatures of other
races to communicate telepathically with a spell weaver, or to read its mind, always
fail. A creature making such an
attempt must succeed at a Will
save (DC 17) or be affected as
if by a confusion spell (caster
level equals spell weaver’s
effective sorcerer level) for
1d6 days. This effect can be
dispelled or removed with a
heal effect.
Spell Weaving (Ex): These
monsters are infamous for their
ability to cast more than one spell at a
time. Casting a spell occupies a number of the spell weaver’s
arms equal to the spell’s level (maximum 6th). A spell
weaver can cast more than one spell simultaneously, as
long as the sum of the spell levels is six or less. It could, for
example, cast one 6th-level spell, one 4th-level and one 2ndlevel spell, one 3rd-level and three 1st-level spells, six 1stlevel spells, or any combination of spells whose levels add
up to six or less. (A single 0-level spell occupies one arm.)
Telepathy (Su): Spell weavers can communicate with
each other telepathically at a range of up to 1,000 miles.
SPELLGAUNT
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 16d10+48 (136 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft., climb 20 ft.
AC: 18 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Bite +24 melee and 2 claws +17 melee
Damage: Bite 1d8+8, claw 1d6+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Disjunctive bite, enhanced bite, force
web, snatch item
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., DR 40/+4, detect
magic, low-light vision, quick leap, SR 35
Saves: Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +5
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 14, Con 16, Int 13, Wis 11, Cha 21
Skills: Balance +10, Climb +11, Hide +14, Jump +19,
Spot +21
Feats: Expertise, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip,
Multiattack, Weapon Focus (bite)
Climate/Terrain: Any forest, mountains
or underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or nest
(10–40)
Challenge Rating: 12
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 17–30 HD (Large);
31–45 HD (Huge)
Spellgaunts feast upon the arcane
energy stored within magic items and
creatures that use spells, draining the
magic from them in the process.
A spellgaunt appears as a bizarre,
elongated arachnid. Its spindly legs
are 10 feet long, and its flat, golden
body is covered with hairy, chitinous plates. The monster has tremendous, saw-edged fangs that
end in fine, razor-sharp points.
Sparkling saliva drips continuously
from its maw.
SPELLGAUNTCOMBAT
A spellgaunt senses magic items and attacks any creature
that carries one. It usually tries to immobilize foes with its
force web first, then moves in to feed, drinking up the
strongest magic first. Foes that evade its webs are bitten and
clawed. If outnumbered, a spellgaunt moves quickly to
snatch any visibly displayed magic items, then flees to its
lair to feed in peace.
Disjunctive Bite (Su): A magic item bitten by a spellgaunt (see Attacking an Object in Chapter 8 of the Player’s
Handbook) must make a successful Will save (DC 23) or
instantly become a nonmagical object. A spellgaunt feeding
on an artifact has a 33% chance of destroying the item. If it
destroys the item, it must make a successful Fortitude save
(DC 25) or die instantly from an overwhelming ingestion of
magical energy.
A spellcaster or a creature with supernatural or spell-like
abilities that is bitten by a spellgaunt must make a Fortitude
save (DC 23) or lose the ability to cast spells or use its magical abilities for 1d2 rounds.
Enhanced Bite (Ex): A spellgaunt’s fangs function as
+4 weapons.
Force Web (Su): A spellgaunt can spray flexible strands
of sticky, invisible force at a single Medium-size or smaller
target up to 20 feet away. A successful Reflex save (DC 23)
lets the target avoid the webs; failure means the creature is
stuck and entangled (–2 penalty on attack rolls and –4
penalty to Dexterity). A force web is immune to damage of
all kinds from most spells, including dispel magic. However,
disintegrate immediately destroys a force web, and it is also
vulnerable to the effects of a sphere of annihilation or a rod of
cancellation. Since force webs extend into the Ethereal
Plane, they also affect ethereal creatures. A force web dissolves after 1d4 hours.
Snatch Item (Ex): A spellgaunt can take an openly displayed magic item away from an opponent with a successful
disarm attempt, whether or not the item is actually a
weapon. It cannot remove armor or other items that are
attached at multiple locations, but it can snatch forcefully
enough to break a single strap or other such attachment—
the strap holding a wand to an opponent’s belt, for example.
Detect Magic (Su): A spellgaunt can see magical auras
in its line of sight to a range of 120 feet. It immediately
senses the aura strength of each magic item and magical
effect it detects.
Quick Leap (Ex): A spellgaunt can make a standing jump
as a free action.
Skills: A spellgaunt receives a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks, a +6 racial bonus on Jump checks, and a +12 racial
bonus on Spot checks.
SPIRIT OF THE LAND
Huge Fey (Incorporeal)
Hit Dice: 20d6+200 (270 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (perfect)
AC: 16 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +7 deflection), touch 16, flat-footed 15
Attacks: None
Damage: None
Space/Reach: 10 ft. by 10 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: All-around vision, elemental manifestation, fast healing 10, incorporeal subtype, low-light
vision, natural invisibility, telepathy, SR 34
Saves: Fort +16, Ref +13, Will +16
Abilities: Str —, Dex 13, Con 30, Int 20, Wis 19, Cha 25
Skills: Animal Empathy +14, Concentration +23, Diplomacy
+9, Knowledge (nature) +16, Listen +15, Search +9, Sense
Motive +18, Spellcraft +18, Spot +17, Wilderness Lore +18
Feats: Cleave*, Dodge, Expertise, Great Cleave*, Improved
Bull Rush*, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip*, Mobility,
Power Attack*, Sunder*
Climate/Terrain: Any
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 23
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 21–30 HD (Huge); 31–60 HD (Gargantuan)
A spirit of the land is a powerful force of nature that lies dormant until the area it guards is threatened. Each inhabits a
particular geographical area, existing as a living part of the
land. A spirit of the land usually assumes dominion over a
small valley, a river, a desert, or some other bounded geographical feature. These creatures dwell in all regions of the
world, and more than one can exist within the same area,
each concerned with a particular aspect of the terrain.
In its natural form, a spirit of the land is an invisible and
intangible force. It appears as a shapeless mist to creatures
that can see invisible things. When it wishes to manifest a
physical form, a spirit of the land can assume the shape of a
humanoid, animal, or elemental of its own size composed of
one particular element—air, earth, fire, or water.
Spirits of the land are always aware of what transpires in
their territories, and they punish all who would ravage or
defile them. They get along well with druids as well as with
races that respect the land.
Spirits of the land speak Common, Elven, Dwarven, and
most goblinoid languages. They can also communicate telepathically with speakers of other languages.
COMBAT
In combat, a spirit of the land prefers to strike invisibly,
using its command over weather, nature, and the elements
to destroy its enemies. Opponents may find themselves


SPIRIT OF THE LAND
confronted by an earthquake, followed by a rain of lightning
bolts accompanied by hurricane-force winds. A spirit attacks
relentlessly, coordinating its actions to keep foes off balance
while remaining unseen. To fight in melee, a spirit of the land
must manifest an elemental form. In this shape, it usually
focuses on destroying one foe before moving on to the next.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—chain lightning, chill metal,
cone of cold, control water, control weather, control winds, create
water, earthquake, fire storm, fog cloud, heat metal, ice storm,
incendiary cloud, lightning bolt, move earth, produce flame,
quench, sleet storm, solid fog, soften earth and stone, spike
stones, stone shape, wall of fire, wall of ice, wall of stone,
whirlwind, wind wall. Caster level 20th; save DC 17 +
spell level.
All-Around Vision (Ex): A spirit of
the land is a part of all the terrain that
surrounds it, so it sees from all directions at once. Because of this ability, it
gains a +4 racial bonus on Search and Spot
checks, and it cannot be flanked, regardless
of its form.
Elemental Manifestation (Su):
Once per day, a spirit of the land can
assume a form composed of elemental
material (air, earth, fire, or water), so long as
that element exists in some form on its terrain. In elemental form, a spirit of the
land is no longer invisible or incorporeal.
It gains the element-specific qualities
noted in the appropriate manifestation section below and loses the benefits of
the incorporeal subtype. Should a
spirit of the land’s elemental
manifestation be destroyed, the
monster dissipates but is
not slain. A dissipated
spirit of the land must wait 24
hours before it can use any of its abilities again.
While a spirit of the land is manifested, the following
changes to its statistics are in effect: AC 19, touch 9, flat-footed
18; Atk +14 melee (2d8+6, 2 slams); SQ DR 30/+3; Str 23.
Incorporeal Subtype: In its incorporeal form, a spirit of
the land can be harmed only by other incorporeal creatures,
+1 or better magic weapons, spells, spell-like abilities, and
supernatural abilities. The creature has a 50% chance to
ignore any damage from a corporeal source, except for force
effects or attacks made with ghost touch weapons. An incorporeal spirit of the land can pass through solid objects, but
not force effects, at will. Its attacks ignore natural armor,
armor, and shields, but deflection bonuses and force effects
work normally against them. An incorporeal spirit of the
land always moves silently and cannot be heard with Listen
checks if it doesn’t wish to be.
Natural Invisibility (Su): An incorporeal spirit of the
land remains invisible even when it attacks. This ability is
always active, but the monster can suppress or resume it as a
free action.
Telepathy (Su): A spirit of the land can communicate
telepathically with any creature within 5 miles that has a
language.
Feats: *A spirit of the land has access to the feats marked
with an asterisk only while it is manifested.
AIR MANIFESTATION
To manifest as air, a spirit of the land must have a
windy valley, breezy seashore, or the like in its terrain. In this form, it gains the following abilities.
Air Mastery (Ex): Any airborne creature takes a –1
penalty on attack and damage rolls made against a
spirit of the land manifested as air.
Flight (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested
as air is naturally buoyant. At will as a free
action, it can produce an effect like that of
the fly spell (caster level 5th), except that the
effect applies only to itself. This ability gives
it a fly speed of 120 feet (perfect).
EARTH MANIFESTATION
An earth manifestation simply requires any
type of land. In this form, a spirit of the land
gains the following ability.
Earth Mastery (Ex): A spirit of the land
manifested as earth gains a +1 bonus on
attack and damage rolls if its foe is touching
the ground.
FIRE MANIFESTATION
A fire manifestation requires a volcanic region,
hot spring, or the like
on the spirit of the
land’s terrain. In this form, it gains
the following abilities.
Burn (Ex): Any creature that is hit by the slam attack of a
spirit of the land manifested as fire, or that hits the monster
with a natural weapon or an unarmed attack, must succeed
at a Reflex save (DC 30) or catch on fire. The fire burns for
1d4 rounds.
Fire Subtype (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested as fire
is immune to fire damage but takes double damage from
cold unless a saving throw for half damage is allowed. In
that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and
double damage on a failure.
WATER MANIFESTATION
To manifest as water, a spirit of the land must have a river,
lake, pond, or other waterway in its terrain. In this form, it
gains the following abilities.
Swim (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested as water can
swim at a speed of 60 feet.
SPIRIT OF
THE LAND
MDWater Mastery (Ex): A spirit of the land manifested as
water gains a +1 bonus on its attack and damage rolls if its
opponent is touching water.

STONE SPIKE
Medium-Size Elemental (Earth)
Hit Dice: 3d8+12 (25 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18
Attacks: 2 slams +6 melee
Damage: Slam 1d8+4
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Qualities: Elemental traits
Saves: Fort +7, Ref +1, Will +1
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 8, Con 19, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11
Skills: Listen +6, Spot +4
Feats: Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary, pair, or gang (3–5)
Challenge Rating: 2
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Large)
The stone spike is a cousin of the earth elemental. Dwarf
spellcasters often summon and bind stone spikes to serve as
guards and to assist
with tunnel construction. They are slow but untiring fighters and workers.
A stone spike resembles a roughly sculpted column of
stone with four or more crystal-tipped arms. Sharp, stony
protrusions cover its body.
Stone spikes seem to like dwarves, and they usually serve
such masters without complaint. Sages speculate that the
monsters think of dwarves as kindred spirits—hard-working,
rugged, and indomitable.
Stone spikes speak Terran and Dwarven.
COMBAT
Stone spikes lack the coordination to employ more than two
of their arms at once. These creatures prefer to plod resolutely
forward in combat, battering any foe that comes within reach.
Elemental Traits (Ex): A stone spike is immune to
poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected.
The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).

SWAMPLIGHT LYNX
Large Magical Beast
Hit Dice: 10d10+30 (85 hp)
Initiative: +5
Speed: 50 ft.
AC: 15 (–1 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 2 claws +14 melee and bite +9 melee
Damage: Claw 1d6+5, bite 1d8+2
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 10 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Improved grab, pounce, rake 1d3+2, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, marsh move
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +5
Abilities: Str 20, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Hide +5*, Jump +6, Listen +7, Move Silently +9, Spot +8
Feats: Dodge, Improved Initiative, Run
Climate/Terrain: Any marsh
Organization: Solitary, pair, or pride (5–10)
Challenge Rating: 7
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 11–15 HD (Large); 16–30 HD (Huge)

Swamplight lynxes are sleek, nocturnal hunters that prowl marshes and wet lowlands. They are fond of humanoid prey, and they especially enjoy the taste of elven flesh.
A swamplight lynx is a sturdy animal, 9 to 10 feet long, with a sleek, lithe, feline body. It has large paws, a small head, and a short tail. Its coat can be any shade from dark yellow to olive, and this coloration allows it to blend in easily with its swampy surroundings.
A swamplight lynx cannot speak, but it can be trained to understand any one language.

COMBAT
Swamplight lynxes are cunning foes, whether stalking their prey over long distances or waiting patiently in ambush. They often use their light ability to surprise, distract and confuse their prey before pouncing with bared claws. Swamplight lynxes are solitary animals, but they do engage in cooperative hunting.
Pounce (Ex): If a swamplight lynx charges, it can make a full attack (including a rake attempt; see below) even though it has moved.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a swamplight lynx hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +19). If it gets a hold, it can also rake on the same round. Thereafter, it has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the swamplight lynx is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Rake (Ex): On any round that a swamplight lynx has a hold on an opponent (see Improved Grab, above), it can make two rake attacks (+14 melee) with its hind legs for 1d3+2 points of damage each. The swamplight lynx can also attempt to rake when it pounces on an opponent.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—blur, daze, faerie fire, light. Caster level 6th; save DC 12 + spell level.
Marsh Move (Ex): Swamplight lynxes take no movement penalties for moving in marshes or mud.
Skills: *A swamplight lynx receives a +4 bonus on Hide checks when in marshlands.

SYLPH
Small Outsider (Air)
Hit Dice: 3d8–3 (10 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 30 ft., fly 90 ft. (good)
AC: 12 (+1 size, +1 Dex), touch 12, flat-footed 11
Attacks: Unarmed strike +3 melee
Damage: Unarmed strike 1d2–1 subdual
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Spells
Special Qualities: Improved invisibility, outsider traits, spells, SR 14, summon elemental
Saves: Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +6
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 8, Int 15, Wis 16, Cha 17
Skills: Animal Empathy +9, Concentration +5, Escape Artist +7, Hide +11, Move Silently +7
Feats: Empower Spell
Climate/Terrain: Temperate and warm mountains
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: Standard (gems and magic items only)
Alignment: Usually neutral
Advancement: 4–9 HD (Small)
Sylphs are native to the Elemental Plane of Air, but they have a liking for the scenery of the Material Plane. They often maintain homes high in the mountains, but since they love to travel, they are rarely found near their homes.
A sylph appears as a small, beautiful woman with translucent, brightly colored wings. The typical sylph prefers filmy clothing and brightly colored jewelry.
Sylphs always become invisible at the approach of strangers and remain so until they know whether there is any danger. The mere presence of danger, however, doesn’t necessarily cause them to flee; they are so naturally curious that they may linger in dangerous situations just to watch. They are generally friendly, especially to human males.
Sylphs speak Auran and Common.

COMBAT
Sylphs seldom engage in physical combat and usually do not carry any weapons. They depend on their spells and special abilities to protect themselves. When threatened, they often summon elementals to defend them.
Spells: A sylph can cast arcane spells as a sorcerer. Caster level = sylph’s Hit Dice + 4; spells known 7/5/3/2; spells/day 6/7/7/5; save DC 13 + spell level.
Improved Invisibility (Sp): At will, a sylph can use improved invisibility (self only).
Outsider Traits: A sylph has darkvision (60-foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Summon Elemental (Sp): Once per day, a sylph can use summon monster VI (caster level 12th) to summon a Large air, earth, fire, or water elemental.

TEMPEST
Gargantuan Elemental (Air, Earth, Fire, Water)
Hit Dice: 24d8+216 (324 hp)
Initiative: –2
Speed: Fly 60 ft. (good)
AC: 24 (–4 size, –2 Dex, +10 natural, +10 deflection), touch 14, flat-footed 24
Attacks: Slam +23/+18/+13/+8 melee
Damage: Slam 2d8+13
Space/Reach: 40 ft. by 40 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Burn, drench, spell-like abilities, whirlwind
Special Qualities: Defensive aura, DR 15/+2, elemental mastery, elemental traits, fire subtype
Saves: Fort +23, Ref +12, Will +8
Abilities: Str 29, Dex 6, Con 28, Int 8, Wis 11, Cha 17
Skills: Concentration +18, Listen +11, Spot +12
Feats: Cleave, Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic neutral
Advancement: 25–48 HD (Gargantuan); 49–72 HD (Colossal)

Though it resembles a massive storm, a tempest is actually an intelligent, living creature related to both elementals and genies. All four elements coexist within its form: air in the wind, earth in the whirling sand and dirt, fire in the heat of the lightning, and water in the rain.
Tempests are uncommunicative for the most part. Very rarely, one of them may know a few dozen words in Common. Other than that, they speak only the languages of the elementals.

COMBAT
A tempest is seldom in a good mood, so most encounters with these creatures end in a battle.
Burn (Ex): Anyone hit by a tempest’s slam attack must succeed at a Reflex save (DC 31) or catch fire. The flame burns for 1d4 rounds. A burning creature can take a moveequivalent action to put out the fire. Any creature hitting a tempest with a natural weapon or unarmed attack takes fire damage as though hit by its slam attack and also catches fire unless it succeeds at a Reflex save.
Drench (Ex): The tempest’s touch puts out torches, campfires, exposed lanterns, and other open flames of nonmagical origin if these are of Huge size or smaller. The creature can dispel magical fire it touches as if by dispel magic (caster level equal to tempest’s HD).
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—chill touch, gust of wind, lightning bolt, wind wall. Caster level 9th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Whirlwind (Su): A tempest can transform itself into a whirlwind (or vortex if underwater) once every 10 minutes and remain in that form for up to 1 round for every 2 HD it has. The whirlwind is 5 feet wide at the base, up to 30 feet wide at the top, and between 10 and 50 feet tall (tempest’s choice). In this form, it can move through the air (or water, as a vortex) or along a surface at its fly speed.
Any creature one or more size categories smaller than the tempest that comes into contact with the whirlwind must make a successful Reflex save (DC 31) or take 4d6 points of damage. It must also succeed at a second Reflex save (DC 31) or be picked up bodily and held suspended in the powerful winds, automatically taking 4d6 points of damage per round. A creature that can fly is allowed a Reflex save at the same DC each round to escape the whirlwind. The creature still takes damage but can leave if the save is successful. The tempest can eject any carried creatures whenever it wishes, depositing them wherever it happens to be.
If the whirlwind’s base touches the ground, it creates a swirling cloud of debris. This cloud is centered on the tempest and has a diameter equal to half the whirlwind’s height. The cloud obscures all vision, including darkvision, beyond 5 feet. Creatures 5 feet away have one-half concealment, while those farther away have total concealment.
Anyone caught in the cloud must succeed at a Concentration check (DC 31) to cast a spell.
Defensive Aura (Sp): A tempest has a +10 deflection bonus to Armor Class. This ability is always in effect.
Elemental Mastery (Ex): A tempest gains a +1 bonus on attack and damage rolls if both it and its foe are in contact with any of the four elements (air, earth, fire, or water).
Elemental Traits (Ex): A tempest is immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. It is not subject to critical hits or flanking, and it cannot be raised or resurrected. The creature also has darkvision (60-foot range).
Fire Subtype (Ex): A tempest is immune to fire damage but takes double damage from cold unless a saving throw for half damage is allowed. In that case, the creature takes half damage on a success and double damage on a failure.

TERATOMORPH
Gargantuan Ooze
Hit Dice: 28d10+170 (324 hp)
Initiative: –3
Speed: 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (poor), swim 90 ft.
AC: 3 (–4 size, –3 Dex), touch 3, flat-footed 3
Attacks: Slam +28 melee
Damage: Slam 4d6+16 plus entropic touch
Space/Reach: 30 ft. by 30 ft./15 ft.
Special Attacks: Entropic touch, portalwake, warp reality
Special Qualities: Blindsight 240 ft., detect law, dimensional instability, immunities, ooze traits, SR 32
Saves: Fort +14, Ref +6, Will +4
Abilities: Str 32, Dex 5, Con 20, Int —, Wis 1, Cha 1
Climate/Terrain: Any aquatic and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 16
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 29–36 HD (Gargantuan); 37–84 HD (Colossal)

Teratomorphs lurk in the watery depths of the sea and in underground caverns. Normally, they spend most of their time floating on underwater currents, but sometimes these currents wash them ashore.
Occasionally they come ashore of their own volition to search for food.
A teratomorph is a shapeless horror the size of a cottage. Its body consists primarily of thick, translucent, iridescent slime coating coils of opaque tissue that shift and move, as though constantly in a state of flux. Beneath its slimy hide, bursts of energy occasionally flash, lighting portions of its form momentarily. Sections of the ooze periodically emit beams of light or crackling energy, while other sections fade into smoke or vanish altogether.
A teratomorph gains nutrients by infesting living creatures with the force of chaos. The very act of transforming another creature with its entropic touch sustains and nurtures the ooze’s growth. But a creature does not have to come in contact with a teratomorph to experience its entropic effects. In fact, the monster’s very presence can unravel reality and tear holes in the fabric between planes. Unlucky creatures that pass too close to a teratomorph sometimes find themselves transported to other planes with no means of returning. Powerful spellcasters have long sought ways to harness the powers of the teratomorph. Unfortunately, portions of the ooze that are separated from the main body do not last long, dissolving into nothingness after only a few hours. The otherworldly matter that makes up the body of a teratomorph remains unstable until enough of it is concentrated in one place that its mass defeats the internal forces working to tear it apart. This effect probably explains why teratomorphs smaller than Gargantuan are never encountered. When such a creature reaches 84 Hit Dice, it immediately splits into smaller oozes, each with 28 Hit Dice.

COMBAT
The teratomorph is a mindless creature. When it isn’t eating, it is on the move looking for something to eat. It surges forth to attack any Small or larger creature that passes within range of its blindsight, but it ignores creatures smaller than this.
A teratomorph attacks by extruding a massive wave of chaotic protoplasm to smash its prey. Not only does this attack deal extensive bludgeoning damage, it also infuses the creature touched with raw chaos.
Entropic Touch (Su): The entropic energy that surges through a teratomorph’s shapeless body causes horrible transformations in living creatures that come into contact with it. If a creature struck by a teratomorph’s slam attack fails a Fortitude saving throw (DC 29), its body transforms in some way, causing one of the following effects:

TERATOMORPH1d20 Result
1–7 Physical Mutation. The touch of the teratomorph transforms the opponent’s anatomy, resulting in 1d6 points of Strength drain or Dexterity drain (50% chance for each).
8–13 Tissue Annihilation. The touch of the ooze causes tiny portions of the opponent’s anatomy to vanish, resulting in 2d4 points of Constitution drain.
14–18 Transformation. The opponent undergoes a transformation as though affected by a polymorph any object spell (caster level 20th). This painful process deals 5d20 points of subdual damage. The DM can randomly determine the subject’s new form or choose a particular form. 
19 Bonding. The ooze sticks to the target and automatically succeeds at a grapple check. Each round thereafter, the teratomorph can attempt a new grapple check (grapple bonus +44) to deal 4d6+16 points of bludgeoning damage. The opponent must succeed at a new Fortitude saving throw (DC 29) each round that the teratomorph deals damage to avoid further effects from the entropic touch. (If this result comes up more than once, roll again.)
20 Absorption. The opponent is entirely absorbed by the ooze. An absorbed creature dies instantly and leaves behind no trace of a body, so only a miracle, true resurrection, or wish spell can restore it to life. Absorbing a creature grants the ooze a new permanent Hit Die.

Portalwake (Su): The presence of a teratomorph places tremendous strain on the borders between the planes, causing tears and rips to appear nearby. Each round, one creature within a 120-foot radius of the teratomorph, chosen at random, must make a Reflex saving throw (DC 19) or be moved to a random plane as though by a plane shift spell.
Warp Reality (Su): The potent chaotic energy that surges through and out of a teratomorph’s body can have amazing effects on the surrounding terrain. When the monster is at rest, this energy is calm, but when the monster moves or attacks, the energy lashes out in a 120-foot emanation. These ripples of chaos cause the surrounding terrain to warp and writhe, imposing a –4 circumstance penalty on attack rolls and Dexterity checks for all creatures in the area except the teratomorph.
Every round that this reality warp persists, there is a 10% chance that the chaotic energy manifests in a more dramatic manner. Such chaos manifestations duplicate spell effects. Roll 1d20 and refer to the appropriate line on the following table to determine the spells effects produced. All these effects function as the spells of the same names (caster level 20th; save DC 10 + spell level), except that they affect all the appropriate targets (except the teratomorph) within the warp reality area and last for 1 round.

Roll Result
1–4 Entangle and obscuring mist
5–8 Color spray and glitterdust
9–12 Stinking cloud and spike growth
13–14 Spike stones and cloudkill
15–16 Insect plague and mind fog
17–18 Acid fog and transmute rock to mud
19 Fire storm and reverse gravity
20 Earthquake and prismatic spray (roll once for all affected creatures)

Blindsight (Ex): A teratomorph is blind, but its entire body is a primitive sensory organ that can ascertain prey by scent and vibration. This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 240 feet. A teratomorph usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures within range of its blindsight.
Detect Law (Su): A teratomorph has a continual detect law ability (as the spell) with a range of 20 feet.
Dimensional Instability (Su): Each time an opponent strikes a teratomorph with a weapon, there is a chance that the portion of the creature’s body struck simply doesn’t exist at that instant. Any melee or ranged attack directed at the teratomorph has a 20% miss chance that cannot be avoided with spells such as true seeing or true strike. Dimensional anchor negates this ability, reducing the miss chance to 0% for the duration of the effect.
Immunities (Ex): A teratomorph is immune to lightning, acid, and all spells with the chaotic descriptor.
Ooze Traits: A teratomorph is immune to mind-affecting effects, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or flanking.

THRI-KREEN
Medium-Size Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 2d8 (9 hp)
Initiative: +2
Speed: 40 ft.
AC: 15 (+2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13
Attacks: 4 claws +3 melee and bite –2 melee, or gythka +4 melee and bite –2 melee, or chatkcha +4 ranged
Damage: Claw 1d4+1, bite 1d4 plus poison, gythka 2d6+1, chatkcha 1d6+1
Special Attacks: Poison, psionics*
Special Qualities: Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to sleep, leap
Saves: Fort +0, Ref +5, Will +4
Abilities: Str 12, Dex 15, Con 11, Int 8, Wis 12, Cha 7
Skills: Balance +4, Climb +3, Hide +4*, Jump +35, Listen +6, Spot +4
Feats: Deflect Arrows (B), Weapon Focus (gythka)
Climate/Terrain: Temperate or warm desert
Organization: Solitary or pack (5–10)
Challenge Rating: 1
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually chaotic neutral
Advancement: By character class

Thri-kreen, often called mantis warriors, are intelligent humanoids with insectlike features. They prefer deserts and savannas, where they maintain a nomadic lifestyle as hunters.
A thri-kreen looks like a bipedal praying mantis. Of the six limbs protruding from its midsection, two are used for walking, and each of the other four ends in a four-fingered hand. A sandy yellow exoskeleton covers an adult thri-kreen’s body. Two compound eyes, two antennae, and a complicated jaw structure that includes a pair of wicked mandibles give its head an insectlike appearance. The typical thri-kreen wears a harness, belt, and slings for holding its equipment, but no clothing or armor.
Thri-kreen are at home in arid, open landscapes where they can easily blend in with the windblown dunes and bare rock. Permanent thri-kreen communities are almost nonexistent; instead, packs of thri-kreen range widely over their own territories, foraging and hunting for daily sustenance. On rare occasions, two or more packs may come together to join their strength against especially dangerous intruders.
Thri-kreen speak a language made up of clicks and snaps of their mandibles. Most thri-kreen whose packs roam near humanoid civilizations also speak Common.

COMBAT
While hunting, thri-kreen use their natural camouflage to sneak up on potential prey. Thrikreen can close to combat (and flee from it) more quickly than most of their foes because of their speed and their ability to leap. They can use the gythka and chatkcha (exotic weapons that are unique to mantis warriors), but they prefer to attack with their claws and their poisoned bites.
Poison (Ex): A thri-kreen delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 11) with a successful bite attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (paralysis for 2d6 minutes). A thrikreen produces enough poison for one bite per day.
Psionics (Sp): *When using the Psionics Handbook, apply the following psionic abilities to a thri-kreen. At will—chameleon, know direction; 1/day—displacement, lesser metaphysical weapon. Manifester level 10th; save DC 8 + power level.
Attack/Defense Modes: ego whip, mind thrust/thought shield, empty mind. A thri-kreen manifests powers, and gains additional attack and defense modes, as if it were a psychic warrior or a psion with Psychometabolism as its primary discipline. (A psionic thri-kreen character’s favored class is psychic warrior, though a few choose monk or psion with the primary discipline of Psychometabolism.)
Immunity to Sleep (Ex): Since thri-kreen do not sleep, they are immune to magic sleep effects. A thri-kreen spellcaster still requires 8 hours of rest before preparing spells.
Leap (Ex): A thri-kreen is a natural jumper. It gains a +30 competence bonus on all Jump checks, and its maximum jumping distance is not limited by height.
Skills: *The exoskeleton of a thri-kreen blends in well with desert terrain, granting it a +4 racial bonus on Hide checks in sandy or arid settings.

THRI-KREEN CHARACTERS
A thri-kreen character’s preferred class is ranger, but a few prefer the path of the cleric or druid. A thri-kreen character begins play with Hit Dice 2d8, which gives it a +2 base attack bonus; base saves Fort +0, Ref +3, Will +3; Deflect Arrows, Exotic Weapon Proficiency [gythka], and Exotic Weapon Proficiency [chatkcha] as bonus feats; one additional feat of choice; and skill points equal to twice its Intelligence score. Its class skills as a thri-kreen are Balance, Climb, Hide, Jump, Listen, and Spot. Many thri-kreen also qualify for the monstrous feats Multiattack, Multidexterity, and Multiweapon Fighting and choose these in preference over other feats.
A nonpsionic thri-kreen PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its class level + 3. Thus, a 1st-level nonpsionic thri-kreen ranger has an ECL of 4 and is the equivalent of a 4th-level character.
A psionic thri-kreen PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its class level +5. Thus, a 1st-level psionic thri-kreen ranger has an ECL of 6 and is the equivalent of a 6th-level character.

THRI-KREEN EQUIPMENT
Thri-kreen warriors have invented two exotic weapons that are unique to their race—the gythka and the chatkcha. These are described below.
Gythka: This Large exotic melee double weapon is a polearm with a blade at each end. The wielder can fight with it as if fighting with two weapons, but doing so incurs all the normal attack penalties associated with fighting with two weapons, as if the wielder had a one-handed weapon and a light weapon (see Attacking with Two Weapons in Chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook). A thri-kreen who has the Multiweapon Fighting feat can wield two gythkas at once as double weapons because of its four arms.
Each end of a gythka deals 2d6 points of damage. Each end is a slashing weapon that deals double damage on a critical hit and threatens a critical hit on an attack roll of 20.
Cost: 60 gp; Weight: 25 lb.
Chatkcha: This Medium-size exotic ranged weapon is a crystalline throwing wedge. Its sheer weight makes it unwieldy in the hands of those not proficient with it.
A chatkcha deals 1d6 points of piercing damage and has a range increment of 20 feet. It deals double damage on a critical hit and threatens a critical hit on an attack roll of 20.
Cost: 1 gp; Weight: 3 lb.

TWIG BLIGHT
Small Plant
Hit Dice: 1d8+1 (5 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 20 ft.
AC: 15 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
Attacks: 2 claws +0 melee
Damage: Claw 1d3–1 plus poison
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Poison
Special Qualities: Partial immunity to piercing weapons, plant traits
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +1, Will +0
Abilities: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 5, Wis 11, Cha 4
Skills: Hide +10, Listen +4, Move Silently +5, Spot +4
Feats: Skill Focus (Hide)
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 1/3
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always chaotic evil
Advancement: 2–3 HD (Small)

Twig blights are treelike creatures of evil disposition. They can root themselves in normal soil and draw nutrients like normal plants, and they look much like woody shrubs in this mode. But these monsters have a special taste for blood, and they greatly prefer that to making food through photosynthesis. Indeed, a twig blight that lives underground must subsist on blood, since it gets no sunlight.
A twig blight normally stands about 3 1/2 feet tall. Its leafless branches interlock to create a humanoid shape. Sages believe that the first twig blights grew from seeds of the Gulthias Tree, which sprouted from a wooden stake used to slay an ancient vampire. Instead of producing fruit, twig blights reproduce through their root systems, like aspen trees.
Twig blights speak Sylvan.

COMBAT
Twig blights usually huddle together in a group, trying to blend in with an area’s natural vegetation (or with piles of debris or firewood) until suitable prey comes along. They particularly enjoy lurking near campsites or waterholes, where they can often catch prey unawares.
Poison (Ex): A twig blight delivers its poison (Fortitude save DC 11) with each successful claw attack. The initial damage is 1 point of Strength damage; there is no secondary damage.
Plant Traits (Ex): A twig blight is immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. It is not subject to critical hits or mind-affecting effects. The creature also has low-light vision.
Skills and Feats: A twig blight gains skills and feats as a fey.

VAPORIGHU
Medium-Size Outsider (Evil)
Hit Dice: 10d8+30 (75 hp)
Initiative: –1
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 20 (–1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 20
Attacks: 2 slams +12 melee
Damage: Slam 1d6+2/19–20 plus corrosive slime
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Corrosive slime, fear aura, poison breath, spell-like abilities
Special Qualities: DR 20/silver, outsider traits, SR 17, summon night hag, uncanny dodge
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +6
Abilities: Str 15, Dex 9, Con 16, Int 13, Wis 8, Cha 10
Skills: Balance +12, Concentration +16, Intimidate +13, Knowledge (the planes) +14, Listen +12, Spellcraft +13, Spot +12
Feats: Improved Bull Rush, Improved Critical (slam), Power Attack
Climate/Terrain: Any land and underground
Organization: Solitary
Challenge Rating: 9
Treasure: Standard
Alignment: Always neutral evil
Advancement: 11–18 HD (Medium-size); 19–30 HD (Large)

Vaporighus are native to the plane of Gehenna. In all respects they are petty, sadistic, and voracious. The only force that motivates them is the gnawing pain of hunger that they can never satiate.
A vaporighu is a hideous, bloated, waddling blob of hairy flesh, vaguely humanoid in shape. Its skin is the color of gangrenous rot and drips with poisonous slime. Long, tangled, and matted fur hangs in shaggy layers from its forearms, back, belly, and stumplike legs, and its head is topped with a pair of small horns. Where its mottled skin is visible, veins of pulsing bile can be seen just beneath the surface. Its breath comes and goes in enormous, wheezing gurgles, punctuated by an occasional explosion of mucus. A vaporighu reeks of all the decay and sulphurous stench of Gehenna.
Vaporighus seem to perform no specific function in Gehenna other than to waylay whatever is unfortunate enough to cross their paths. They often pick out likely hiding places near portals or the rare watering holes in Gehenna and wait for victims to approach.
Vaporighus speak Abyssal and Infernal, but they usually do not communicate.

COMBAT
Vaporighus are tenacious opponents. They fight without subtlety or art, and they fight to the death.
Corrosive Slime (Ex): Vaporighus constantly exude a mucuslike slime that contains a corrosive substance. A vaporighu’s slam attack leaves behind a smear of slime. An opponent’s armor and clothing dissolve and become useless in 1 round unless the wearer succeeds at a Reflex save (DC 18). Any weapon that strikes a vaporighu dissolves in 1 round unless the wielder succeeds at a Reflex save (DC 18). Even on a failed save, armor, clothing, or weapons can be saved by washing, which requires a full-round action and at least 1 pint of water or weak acid (such as wine) per item.
Fear Aura (Su): Anyone (except other vaporighus) who sees a vaporighu within 30 feet must make a Will saving throw (DC 15) or become frightened for 2d4 rounds. An opponent who succeeds at the saving throw is immune to that vaporighu’s fear aura for 24 hours. This is a mind-affecting fear effect.
Poison Breath (Ex): Once every 1d4 rounds, a vaporighu can exhale poison breath as a standard action. This creates a 15-foot cone of toxic and corrosive green vapor. Every creature in the area takes 1d10 points of acid damage (no saving throw). The vapor is poisonous (Fortitude save DC 18). The primary damage is paralysis (3d6 rounds); the secondary damage is 3d6 Con. The vapor lingers for 2d6 rounds, dealing acid damage and requiring a new saving throw each round a creature remains within it or touches it. Vaporighus are immune to their own poison breath and to that of others of their kind.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—animate objects, enlarge, fly, light, mislead, produce flame, sleep. Caster level 10th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Outsider Traits: A vaporighu has darkvision (60-foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected. Summon Night Hag (Sp): Once per day, a vaporighu can summon one night hag. This ability functions like a summon monster VII spell (caster level 10th).
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Because of its unusual talent for detecting prey, a vaporighu retains its Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) even when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked.

WINDGHOST
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 18d8+72 (153 hp)
Initiative: +10
Speed: Fly 30 ft. (good)
AC: 21 (–2 size, +6 Dex, +7 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 15
Attacks: Bite +21 melee
Damage: Bite 2d8+13
Space/Reach: 5 ft. by 5 ft./5 ft.
Special Attacks: Darkvision 60 ft., improved grab, spelllike abilities, swallow whole, windsong
Special Qualities: Fast healing 3, flight, immunities, SR 25, true seeing
Saves: Fort +10, Ref +14, Will +13
Abilities: Str 28, Dex 23, Con 18, Int 15, Wis 14, Cha 19
Skills: Hide +12, Knowledge (arcana) +15, Listen +17, Spot +18
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative,
Lightning Reflexes, Weapon Focus (bite)
Climate/Terrain: Any temperate or warm
Organization: Solirary, pair, brood (3–5), or swarm (6–10)
Challenge Rating: 15
Treasure: None
Alignment: Usually lawful
Advancement: 19–32 HD (Huge); 33–54 HD (Gargantuan)

Mysterious observers that float casually through the skies, windghosts are unfathomable creatures that inspire curiousity, puzzlement, and sometimes fear.
The body of a windghost is conical. From top to base, it measures 24 feet. At its base is a gaping, circular mouth, 8 feet across and lined with rows of teeth. Its body tapers up to a rounded cap. A windghost’s rough and mottled hide is purplish gray in color, and it has milk-white eyes. The windghost has two 20-foot tentacles dangling from either side of its base. These appendages primarily serve to carry items. A windghost’s body and eyes sparkle with ripples of blue and violet light. This light is strong enough to illuminate the creature’s form but makes it apppear ghostly, hence its name.
Windghosts may appear frightening, but they are not aggressive creatures. Nonetheless, their unexpected arrivals and strange appearance often lead to unprovoked attacks from frightened ground-dwellers.
Windghosts speak Auran.

COMBAT
Windghosts never attack without provocation. When threatened, they surround themselves with magical protections before swooping down to physically attack. If facing overpowering opponents, windghosts flee, flying straight up until they are out of sight.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a windghost hits an opponent that is at least one size category smaller than itself with a bite attack, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +30). If it gets a hold, it can try to swallow in the next round. Alternatively, the windghost has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its jaws to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the windghost is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals bite damage.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—antimagic field, dispel magic, spell turning. Caster level 16th; save DC 14 + spell level.
Swallow Whole (Ex): A windghost can swallow a single creature that is at least two size categories smaller than itself by making a successful grapple check (grapple bonus +30), provided it already has that opponent in its mouth (see Improved Grab, above). Once inside the windghost, the opponent takes 1d8+4 points of bludgeoning damage and 1d6+2 points of acid damage per round from the monster’s stomach. A successful grapple check allows the swallowed creature to climb out of the stomach and return to the windghost’s mouth, where another successful grapple check is needed to get free. Alternatively, a swallowed creature can try to cut its way out with either claws or a light piercing or slashing weapon. Dealing at least 25 points of damage to the stomach (AC 20) in this way creates an opening large enough to permit escape. Once a single swallowed creature exits, muscular action closes the hole; thus, another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out. A Huge windghost’s stomach can hold 1 Medium-size, 4 Small, 16 Tiny, or 64 Diminutive or smaller opponents.
Windsong (Su): Two or more windghosts within 90 feet of each other can emit a harmonizing sonic drone that throws off the equilibrium of any creature that hears it. The sound causes any creature within 120 feet (except windghosts ) that fails a Will save (DC 23) to take a –6 circumstance penalty on Concentration checks, a –8 enhancement penalty to Dexterity, and move at half normal speed. These penalties remain as long as the windghosts continue to sing. A successful save renders a creature immune to that particular pair of windghosts’ windsong for 24 hours. Windghosts can end a windsong at will.
Fast Healing (Ex): A windghost regains lost hit points at the rate of 3 per round. Fast healing does not restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, and it does not allow the windghost to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
Flight (Ex): A windghost is naturally buoyant and can fly (as the spell) as a free action at a speed of 30 feet.
Immunities (Ex): Windghosts are immune to air and mind-affecting effects.
True Seeing (Su): A windghost sees all things as if affected by true seeing (arcane version).

WYSTE
Huge Aberration
Hit Dice: 5d8+25 (47 hp)
Initiative: +1
Speed: 10 ft., swim 40 ft.
AC: 18 (–2 size, +1 Dex, +9 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 17
Attacks: 7 tentacle rakes +7 melee
Damage: Tentacle rake 1d4+6
Space/Reach: 15 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Bite, improved grab
Special Qualities: Acid immunity, blindsight 120 ft.
Saves: Fort +6, Ref +2, Will +4
Abilities: Str 22, Dex 13, Con 20, Int 1, Wis 11, Cha 8
Skills: Listen +6, Spot +6, Swim +14
Feats: Alertness, Improved Critical (bite)
Climate/Terrain: Any underground
Organization: Solitary, pair or school (3–8)
Challenge Rating: 5
Treasure: None
Alignment: Always neutral
Advancement: 6–15 HD (Huge)
Level Adjustment: -

The wyste (pronounced “wist”) is an alien creature much like a giant worm that inhabits fetid pools of alien slime.
A typical specimen is 2 feet in diameter and 25 feet long. A wyste’s skin is translucent, showing strange, twisted strands of pulsing organs underneath. The creature has no face, just a large sucker hole fringed by long, claw-tipped tentacles. The tentacles allow the wyste to feed and defend itself, and they also serve as sensory organs. So far as is known, a wyste operates only by instinct and lives to feed.

COMBAT
A wyste lunges up to 15 feet out of its slimy pools to attack creatures that approach. Wystes in an area often attack as a group; others nearby might be attracted by the commotion, too. When a wyste kills a victim, it drags its prey away to be consumed at leisure.
Bite (Ex): When a wyste grapples an opponent, its tentacles draw the victim to its toothed sucker hole. On the round after the wyste grabs, it makes a regular attack with its bite (in lieu of any claw attacks), gaining a +4 bonus on the attack roll (+11 melee). If the bite attack misses, the wyste drops the character, who falls prone in front of the creature. If the bite attack is successful, the victim takes 1d6+9 points of damage. The wyste can then deal bite damage automatically every round. The victim can escape by winning an opposed grapple check against the wyste, making a successful Escape Artist check against the wyste’s grapple check result, or by killing the wyste.
Improved Grab (Ex): If a wyste hits a Large or smaller opponent with one or more tentacle attacks, it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity (grapple bonus +17, plus a +2 bonus for each tentacle that hit beyond the first). The wyste can make only one grapple attack per round, no matter how many tentacles it devotes to the effort. If it gets a hold, it has the option to conduct the grapple normally, or simply use its tentacles to hold the opponent (–20 penalty on grapple check, but the wyste is not considered grappled). In either case, each successful grapple check it makes during successive rounds automatically deals damage for all the tentacles used to hold the opponent.
Blindsight (Ex): A wyste is blind, but its tentacles are sensory organs that can ascertain prey by scent and vibration. This ability enables it to discern objects and creatures within 120 feet. A wyste usually does not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice creatures within range of its blindsight.

YAK FOLK
Large Monstrous Humanoid
Hit Dice: 5d8+10 (32 hp)
Initiative: +4
Speed: 30 ft.
AC: 16 (–1 size, +7 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 16
Attacks: Quarterstaff +9 melee, or falchion +8 melee
Damage: Quarterstaff 1d6+6, falchion 2d4+6/18–20
Space/Reach: 10 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks: Body meld
Special Qualities: Command genie, darkvision 60 ft., use staff
Saves: Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +6
Abilities: Str 18, Dex 11, Con 15, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 14
Skills: Disguise +10, Heal +10, Knowledge (arcana) +10, Use Magic Device +10
Feats: Improved Initiative(B), Power Attack, Weapon Focus (quarterstaff)
Climate/Terrain: Any mountains
Organization: Solitary, pair, or herd (3–12 plus 1 leader of 1st–5th level and 1–2 humanoid or giant slaves per yak folk), or tribe (11–20 plus 1 leader of 5th–12th level, 1–2 lieutenants of 1st–5th level, 1–2 humanoid or giant slaves per yak folk, and a force of 10–40 fighting slaves)
Challenge Rating: 4
Treasure: Standard plus staff (see below)
Alignment: Usually neutral evil
Advancement: By character class
Level Adjustment: +2

Yak folk are humanoid yaks who walk about on their hind legs, dress in fine clothing, and dabble in magic. They are slightly smaller than minotaurs, but aside from a vague resemblance they have little in common with those creatures. Their shaggy fur is generally well groomed, and their horns are often decorated with tassels or silver tips. Jewelry is common, and they wear fine clothing of wool and silk. All adult yak folk carry staffs that are often magical, and most also arm themselves with falchions.
Yak folk live among remote mountain peaks and valleys, inaccessible to all but the hardiest travelers and explorers.
Yak folk speak Common.

COMBAT
Most yak folk use their falchions or staffs, magical or otherwise, in combat.
Body Meld (Sp): Once per day a yak folk can merge its body with that of a humanoid or giant of Small to Large size. Except where noted here, this power functions like a magic jar spell heightened to 9th level (caster level 20th; Will save DC 21 negates). To use this ability, the yak folk must touch the intended target for 20 minutes without interruption (yak folk usually restrain their victims while using this ability). At the end of this period, the target must make a Will save to remain conscious. On a failed save, the host’s mind becomes unconscious, and the yak folk assumes control. There is no magic jar per se—the yak folk physically merges its body with the victim’s body without the use of an intermediate vessel. Body meld lasts until dispelled or dismissed.
The process works only on humans, elves, dwarves, halforcs, and any creature of the giant type. The yak folk shares all the victim’s knowledge, memories, skills, feats, and extraordinary abilities, but none of its spell-like or supernatural abilities. The yak folk retains all of its own supernatural and spell-like abilities. The merging does not shed a magical aura (so a detect magic spell does not reveal it), but a true seeing spell reveals the victim’s dual nature.
If the host body is slain, the yak folk dies with it. Separating the two bodies takes half as long as melding (10 minutes). The host regains consciousness 1d6 minutes after the separation is complete.
Only characters who know the victim personally have any chance to realize that something is wrong, by making a Spot check opposed by the yak folk’s Disguise check (which in this case represents how well the yak folk impersonates its host).
Command Genie (Su): Once per day, a yak folk can summon and command a janni of evil alignment, but it can never have more than one janni under its control at one time. The janni is a slave bound to serve until the second sunrise after the summoning. The yak folk are greatly disliked by all genies, but for reasons lost in antiquity, no genie can attack a yak folk. Genies sometimes work to thwart the yak folk’s plans or disrupt their lives in other, indirect ways, but even this is done cautiously because the genies know that if they antagonize the yak folk too much, the lives of enslaved jann will only become worse and their tasks more onerous.
Use Staff (Ex): A yak folk can use any magic staff. This ability is similar to the Use Magic Device skill except that it applies only to magic staffs and the yak folk does not require a skill check. The chance that any particular yak folk possesses a magic staff is equal to its Hit Dice × 5%.

YAK FOLK SOCIETY
Yak folk settle in secluded mountain valleys, creating realms that are sheltered from the worst of nature’s abuse—havens of greenery and life in the midst of barren, snowcovered peaks. In these seemingly idyllic hideaways, the yak folk rule over their human, elf, or dwarf subjects with iron fists.
The yak folk, for all their learning and culture, are enormously evil overlords. They care for their hapless subjects only to the extent that a live serf is better than a dead one, and keeping a serf alive is easier than working oneself.
Outsiders stumbling into an enclave of yak folk are usually surprised and pleased to find what appears to be a utopia hidden in the mountains, and the yak folk do all in their power to foster that image until the strangers can be disarmed and enslaved.
Their cities consist of several thousand yak folk plus five or six times as many enslaved minions. A city is surrounded by smaller enclaves and tribal outposts.

YAK FOLK CHARACTERS
A yak folk’s favored class is sorcerer. Most yak folk leaders are sorcerers or sorcerer/clerics. Yak folk clerics tend to venerate chaotic and evil gods and often have access to the Evil and Trickery domains.
A yak folk PC’s effective character level (ECL) is equal to its class level + 7. Thus, a 1st-level yak folk sorcerer has an ECL of 8 and is the equivalent of an 8th-level character.

###

YUGOLOTH
Possibly the greediest, most selfish beings in the Outer Planes, yugoloths reign supreme among the evil outsiders of the plane of Gehenna.
Yugoloths often act as mercenaries for demons, devils, and other planar powers. They are enthusiastic bodyguards and soldiers because they take such glee in hurting others, but they turn on their masters if the enemy makes them a better offer. They also make good torturers, because they delight in misery.
The yugoloths are led by a yugoloth of surpassing power known as the General of Gehenna, who rules with an iron fist—exactly as far as his reach extends. There is no widespread or organized opposition to his rule, but yugoloths outside his immediate sphere of influence have little hesitation about acting independently. The General rules from the Crawling City, a great metropolis supported by thousands of graftedtogether legs that slowly wanders the volcanic Gehennan landscape.
Whatever their form, yugoloths tend to have the smell of brimstone around them. In their native form, they leave a faint trail of ash unless they consciously choose not to.
Yugoloths speak Abyssal, Draconic, and Infernal.

COMBAT

In general, yugoloths are focused combatants. They choose one opponent out of a group and attack until it falls, then move on to the next foe. They fight at a frantic pace, using their best attacks and spell-like abilities right away, even if they’re not sure what they’re facing.
All yugoloths have the following special abilities in common.
Outsider Traits: A yugoloth has darkvision (60-foot range). It cannot be raised or resurrected.
Summon Yugoloth (Sp): Most yugoloths can summon others of their kind as though casting a summon monster spell, but they have only a limited chance of success. Roll d%: On a failure, no yugoloths answer the summons. Summoned creatures remain for 1 hour, then return whence they came. A yugoloth that is itself summoned cannot use its own summon ability for 1 hour.
Yugoloth Traits: A yugoloth is immune to poison an acid. It has cold, fire, and electricity resistance 20. Yugoloths can communicate telepathically with any creature within 100 feet that has a language.

MARRAENOLOTH
The marraenoloths serve a specialized function, possibly the most specialized of any of the yugoloths. They are the ferrymen on the River Styx, somberly poling their ghastly crafts along that sepulchral river and through all the horrid planes it visits.
These pallid humanoids are little more than skeletons clothed in rotted robes and grave wrappings. Only their red-glowing eyes show signs of life. Like all natives of Gehenna, they are pitiless and mercenary. They can speak any language, but they communicate with other marraenoloths telepathically.
Only by remaining scrupulously neutral in their dealings with all others do the marraenoloths retain the ability to move freely throughout the evil-aligned Outer Planes. They can move away from the River Styx, but their skiffs cannot, and a marraenoloth seldom goes anywhere its boat can’t take it.
Marraenoloths never carry cargo, only passengers. Payment must be made in advance and must be at least 100 gp per passenger. Although marraenoloths seldom, if ever, get lost on the labyrinthine channels of the Styx, there is a 15% chance on any chartered journey that the boatman delivers the passengers into an ambush, arranged and paid for by a third party. Each additional 100 gp paid per passenger reduces the chance by 5%.

Combat
Marraenoloths rely almost exclusively on their spell-like abilities for offense and defense.
Fear Gaze (Su): When a marraenoloth stares at a creature, the latter must succeed at a Will saving throw (DC 15) or become shaken for 1d4 rounds. This is a mind-affecting fear effect.
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—alter self, animate dead, charm person, phantasmal killer, poison, produce flame, teleport without error. Caster level 10th; save DC 10 + spell level.
Summon Yugoloth (Sp): Once per day, a marraenoloth can summon another marraenoloth with a 75% chance of success.

ARCANALOTH
Arcanaloths are the scribes, record-keepers, negotiators, and deal-makers for the yugoloths of Gehenna. As such, they aregrasping, wheedling manipulators, but at least they’re generally true to their word.
An arcanaloth has humanoid form but the head of a jackal or dog. It dresses finely but is businesslike and abrupt, if not downright surly.
Arcanaloths can speak and write any language.

Combat
Arcanaloths are weak in melee, but they are powerful spellcasters. In addition to all the usual powers of yugoloths, arcanaloths have the following special abilities.
Partial Immunity to Spells: Mind-affecting spells have no effect on arcanaloths.
Poison (Ex): An arcanaloth’s claws are coated with poison. It delivers this poison (Fortitude save DC 16) with each successful claw attack. The initial and secondary damage is the same (1 point of Strength damage).
Spell-Like Abilities: At will—darkness, fly, heat metal, invisibility (self only), magic missile, shapechange, telekinesis, warp wood; 1/day—fear, major image. Caster level 12th; save DC 13 + spell level.
Spells: An arcanaloth can cast arcane spells as a 12th-level sorcerer (spells known 9/5/5/4/3/2/1; spells/day 6/7/7/ 7/6/5/3; save DC 13 + spell level, or 15 + spell level for Abjuration spells).
Summon Yugoloth (Sp): Once per day, an arcanaloth can summon another arcanaloth with a 40% chance of success.

YAGNOLOTH
In the simplistic feudal hierarchy of Gehenna, yagnoloths are minor lords. Each rules over a territory, with vassal yugoloths at its beck and call. The rationale behind this arrangement is not clear, since yagnoloths are neither stronger nor brighter than many of their subjects. Whatever the reason, the ruling powers of Gehenna enforce the existing order, and the yagnoloths profit from it.
In fact, the yagnoloths squeeze every advantage possible from their positions, up to and including sanctioning executions of yugoloths that are considerably more physically and magically powerful than themselves, but lower in the hierarchy. Such actions are little different from what any yugoloth would do if given the opportunity. Nonetheless, the fact that the yagnoloths’ authority exceeds their personal power has earned them a special sort of resentment. No other yugoloth can pass up an opportunity to betray its yagnoloth overlord—for the right price.
As a secondary effect of their despised status, yagnoloths cannot summon other yugoloths.
A yagnoloth is humanoid and stands 10 to 15 feet tall. Its hide is red and scaly; its head is small and skeletal and topped by ears resembling bats’ wings. A yagnoloth’s favored arm is enormous, thickly knotted with muscles, and long enough to drag on the ground. It uses this arm for its claw attack. The other arm appears small in comparison and is about the size of a normal human arm. This arm is always the one it uses to wield a weapon. The weapon may be a magic item but is never a specific weapon or one with a special ability. A yagnoloth that possessed such a weapon would be assassinated in short order by its underlings.

Combat
A yagnoloth always attacks with both arms in melee. It wields a greataxe or greatsword with its smaller arm, but that arm is fairly weak (Str 10) and the yagnoloth does not receive any Strength bonus when using it.
Breath Weapon (Su): As a standard action, a yagnoloth can exhale a cloud of acid every 1d4 rounds. This cloud affects a single 5-foot cone for 1 round. A character in that space must make a Reflex saving throw (DC 19); failure means the character takes 2d6 points of acid damage and is stunned for an equal number of rounds.
Energy Drain (Su): The truly horrific power of the yagnoloth is its ability to drain life force. The victim must be unconscious or stunned. The yagnoloth places its head against the victim’s flesh. For each full round the yagnoloth remains in contact, the victim gains 1d4 negative levels. The Fortitude save DC to remove each negative level is 18.
Shocking Grasp (Sp): A yagnoloth can use this ability three times per day, causing 1d8+10 points of electricity damage each time. Caster level 10th.
Stunning Blow (Ex): Any character struck by a yagnoloth’s massive arm must make a Fortitude saving (DC 25) to avoid being stunned for a number of rounds equal to the points of damage dealt by the blow.
Muscular Arm (Ex): A yagnaloth’s larger arm functions as a primary natural weapon, even when it is used to make secondary attacks. This ability negates any secondary attack penalty and allows the yagnaloth its full Strength bonus with its claw, whether the attack is primary or secondary.
Stunning Blow: A creature that fails its Fortitude save is stunned for a number of rounds equal to the yagnaloth's damage roll (1d6, without Strength modifier).

							  Marraenoloth									 Arcanaloth										Yagnoloth
							  Medium-Size Outsider (Evil)				 Medium-Size Outsider (Evil)				 Large Outsider (Evil)
Hit Dice:				  10d8 (45 hp)									 12d8 (54 hp)									 10d8+40 (85 hp)
Initiative:				+2												  +7												  +2
Speed:					  50 ft.											 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (poor)					50 ft.
Armor Class:			  21 (+2 Dex, +9 natural),					 28 (+3 Dex, +15 natural),					21 (–1 size, +2 Dex, +10
							  touch 12, flat-footed 19					 touch 13, flat-footed 25 natural),		touch 11, flat-footed 19
Base Attack/Grapple:	+10/+11											+12/+12											+10/+24
Attack:					 Bite +11 melee								  2 claws +12 melee and bite				  Greatsword +9/+4 melee and
																					+7 melee										  claw +20 melee, or greataxe
																																		 +9/+4 melee and claw +20 melee
Full Attack:			  Bite 1d6+1										Claw 1d4 plus poison, bite 1d6			 Greatsword 2d6/19–20, greataxe
																																		 1d12/×3, claw 1d6+10 plus
																																		 stunning blow
Space/Reach:			  5 ft./5 ft.									  5 ft./5 ft.									  5 ft./10 ft.
Special Attacks:		 Fear gaze, spell-like abilities			Poison, spell-like abilities,			  Breath weapon, energy drain,
																					spells											 shocking grasp, stunning blow
Special Qualities:	  Outsider traits, SR 21,					  DR 15/+3, outsider traits,				  DR 15/+1, outsider traits, SR 25,
							  yugoloth traits								 partial immunity to spells, SR 24,		muscular arm, yugoloth traits
																					yugoloth traits
Saves:					  Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +9					 Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +14				  Fort +11, Ref +9, Will +9
Abilities:				 Str 13, Dex 15, Con 10,					  Str 11, Dex 16, Con 11,					  Str 30, Dex 14, Con 19,
							  Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 10						Int 20, Wis 18, Cha 17						Int 15, Wis 15, Cha 16
Skills:					 Appraise +14, Balance +15,				  Bluff +18, Concentration +15,			  Bluff +16, Climb +22, Concentration +17,
							  Bluff +13, Diplomacy +8,					 Diplomacy +22, Gather						 Diplomacy +5, Intimidate +16,
							  Intimidate +8, Intuit Direction			Information +18, Intimidate				 Jump +20, Knowledge (the planes)
							  +15, Knowledge (the planes)				 +20, Knowledge (arcana) +20,				+15, Listen +15, Sense Motive
							  +14, Listen +11, Profession				 Knowledge (the planes) +20,				 +15, Spot +15
							  (boater) +15, Spot +11, Survival		  Listen +19, Profession (scribe)
							  +15, Swim +14									+19, Search +20, Sense Motive +19,
																					Spellcraft +22, Spot 19
Feats:					  Alertness, Combat Casting,				  Combat Casting, Empower Spell,			 Cleave, Great Cleave,
							  Dodge, Mobility								 Improved Initiative, Iron Will,			Power Attack, Weapon Focus (claw)
																					Focus (Abjuration)
Climate/Terrain:		 Any aquatic									  Any land and underground					 Any land and underground
Organization:			 Solitary										  Solitary, pair, or embassy (3–4)		  Solitary
Challenge Rating:		10												  17												  10
Treasure:				  Standard (coins only)						 Standard										  Standard
Alignment:				 Always neutral evil							Always neutral evil							Always neutral evil
Advancement:			  11–20 HD (Medium-size)						13–24 HD (Medium-size)						11–30 HD (Large)204
Level Adjustment:		+5												  +7												  +6

